372 Our Visit to Richmond. [September,
OUR VISIT TO RICHMOND.
W H Y W E WENT T H E R E .
W hy my companion, the Rev. Dr.
Jaquess, Colonel of the Seventy - Third
Regiment of Illinois Volunteers, recently
went to Richmond, and the circumstances
attending his previous visit within the
Rebel lines,—when he wore his uniform,
and mixed openly with scores of leading
Confederates,—I shall shortly make
known to the public in a volume called
“ Down in Tennessee.” It may now, however,
he asked why I, a “ civil” individual,
and not in the pay of Government,
became his travelling-companion, and, at
a time when all the world was rushing
North to the mountains and the watering-
places, journeyed South for a conference
with the arch-Rebel, in the hot
and dangerous latitude of Virginia.
Did it never occur to you, reader,
when you have undertaken to account for
some of the simplest of your own actions,
liow many good reasons have arisen in
your mind, every one of which has justified
you in concluding that you were of
“ sound and disposing understanding” ?
So, now, in looking inward for the why
and the wherefore which I know will be
demanded of me at the threshold of this
article, I find half a dozen reasons for
my visit to Richmond, any one of which
ought to prove that I am a sensible man,
altogether too sensible to go on so long
a journey, in the heat of midsummer, for
the mere pleasure of the thing. Some
of these reasons I will enumerate.
First: Very many honest people at the
North sincerely believe that the revolted
States will return to the Union, if assured
of protection to their peculiar institution.
The Government having declared
that no State shall be readmitted which
has not first abolished Slavery, these people
hold it responsible for the continuance
of the war. It is, therefore, important
to know whether the Rebel States will
or will not return, if allowed to retain
Slavery. Mr. Jefferson Davis could, undoubtedly’,
answer that question ; and that
mayr have been a reason why I went to
see him.
Second: On the second of July last,
C. C. Clay, of Alabama, J. P. Holcombe,
of Virginia, and G. N. Sanders, of nowhere
in particular, appeared at Niagara
Falls, and publicly’ announced that
they’ were there to confer with the Democratic
leaders in reference to the Chicago
nomination. Very’ soon thereafter, a
few friends of the Administration received
intimations from those gentlemen that
they were Commissioners from the Rebel
Government, with authority to negotiate
preliminaries of peace on something like
the following basis, namely: A restoration
of the Union as it was; all negroes
actually freed by the war to be declared
free, and all negroes not actually freed by
the war to he declared slaves.
These overtures were not considered
sincere. They seemed concocted to embarrass
the Government, to throw upon
it the odium of continuing the war, and
thus to secure the triumph of the peacetraitors
at the November election. The
scheme, if well managed, threatened to
be dangerous, by uniting the Peace-men,
the Copperheads, and such of the Republicans
as love peace better than principle,
in one opposition, willing to make a peace
that would be inconsistent with the safety
and dignity of the country. I t wras,
therefore, important to discover — what
was then in doubt — whether the Rebel
envoys really had, or had not, any official
authority.
Within fifteen days of the appearance
of these “ Peace Commissioners,” Jefferson
Davis had said to an eminent Secession
divine, who, late in June, came
through the Union lines by the Maryland
back - door, that he would make
peace on no other terms than a recognition
of Southern Independence, (lie
might, however, agree to two governOur
Visit 1864.] to Richmond. 373
ments, bound together by a league offensive
and defensive, — for all external
purposes one, for all internal purposes
two; but he would agree to notliing better.)
There was reason to consider this information
trustworthy, and to believe Mr
Davis (who was supposed to be a clearminded
man) altogether ignorant of the
doings of his Niagara satellites. If this
were true, and were proven to be true,
—if the great Rebel should reiterate this
declaration in the presence of a trustworthy
witness, at the very time when the
small Rebels were opening their Quaker
guns on the country,—would not the Niagara
negotiators be stripped of their false
colors, and their low schemes be exposed
to the scorn of all honest men, North and
South ?
I may have thought so; and that may
have been another reason why I went to
Richmond.
Third: I had been acquainted with
Colonel Jaquess’s peace-movements from
their inception. Early in June last he
wrote me from a battle-field in Georgia,
announcing his intention of again visiting
the Rebels, and asking an interview
with me at a designated place. We met,
and went to Washington together. Arriving
there, I became aware that obstacles
were in the way of his further progress.
Those obstacles could be removed
by my aceompanyiug'him ; and that, to
those who know the man and his “ mission,”
which is to preach peace on earth
and good-will among men, would seem
a very good reason why I went to Richmond.
Fourth, — and this to very many may
appear as potent as any of the preceding
reasons,—I had in my boyhood a strange
fancy for church - belfries and libertypoles.
This fancy led me, in school-vacations,
to perch my small self for hours
on the cross-beams in the old belfry, and
to climb to the very top of the tall pole
which still surmounts the little villagegreen.
In my youth, this feeling was
simply a spirit of adventure; but as I
grew older it deepened into a reverence
for what those old bells said, and a love
for the principle of which that old liberty-
pole is now only a crumbling symbol.
H
ad not events shown that Jeff. Davis
had never seen that old liberty-pole, and
never heard the chimes which still ring
out from that old belfry ? Who knew,
in these days when every wood-sawyer
has a “ mission,” but I had a “ mission,”
and it was to tell the Rebel President
that Northern liberty - poles still stand
for Freedom, and that Northern churchbells
still peal out, “ Liberty throughout
the land, to all the inhabitants thereof”
?
If that was my mission, will anybody
blame me for fanning Mr. Davis with a
“ blast ” of cool Northern “ wind ” in
this hot weather ?
But enough of mystification. The
straightforward reader wants a straightforward
reason, and he shall have it.
We went to Richmond because we
hoped to pave the way for negotiations
that would result in peace.
If we should succeed, the consciousness
of having served the country would, we
thought, pay our expenses. If wc should
fail, but return safely, we might still serve
the country by making public the cause
of our failure. If we should fail, and not
return safely, but be shot or hanged as
spies,—as we might be, for we could have
no protection from our Government, and
no safe-conduct from the Rebels,— two
lives would be added to the thousands
already sacrificed to this Rebellion, but
they would as effectually serve the country
as if lost on the battle-field.
These are the reasons, and the only
reasons, why we went to Richmond.
H OW WE W ENT T H E R E .
We went there in an ambulance, and
we went together,—the Colonel and I;
and though two men were never more unlike,
we worked together like two brothers,
or like two halves of a pair of shears.
That we got in was owing, perhaps, to
me; that we got out was due altogether
374 Our Visit to Richmond.
to him; and a man more cool, more brave,
more self-reliant, and more self-devoted
than that quiet “ Western parson ” it
never was my fortune to encounter.
When the far-away Boston bells were
sounding nine, on the morning of Saturday,
the sixteenth of July, we took our
glorious Massachusetts General by the
hand, and said to him, —
“ Good bye. If you do not see us within
ten days, you will know we have ‘ gone
up.’ ”
“ If I do not see you within that time,”
he replied, “ I ’ll demand you ; and if they
don’t produce you, body and soul, I ’ll
take two for one, — better men than you
are, — and hang them higher than Haman.
My hand on that. Good bye.”
At three o’clock on the afternoon of
the same day, mounted on two raw-boned
relics of Sheridan’s great raid, and
armed with a letter to Jeff. Davis, a white
cambric handkerchief tied to a short
stick, and an honest face, — this last was
the Colonel’s, — we rode up to the Rebel
lines. A ragged, yellow-faced boy, with
a carbine in one hand, and another white
handkerchief tied to another short stick
in the other, came out to meet us.
“ Can you tell us, my man, where to
find Judge Ould, the Exchange Commissioner
? ”
“ Yas. Him and t’other ’Change officers
is over ter the plantation beyont
Miss Grover’s. Ye ’ll know it by its
hevin’ nary door nur winder [the mansion,
he meant]. They’s all busted in.
Foller the bridle-path through the timber,
and keep your rag a-flyin’, fur our
boys is thicker ’n huckelberries in them
woods, and they mought pop yc, ef they
did n’t seed it.”
Thanking him, we turned our horses
into the “ timber,” and, galloping rapidly
on, soon came in sight of the deserted
plantation. Lolling on the grass, in the
shade of the windowless mansion, wc
found the Confederate officials. They
rose as we approached; and one of us
said to the Judge, — a courteous, middle-
aged gentleman, in a Panama hat,
and a suit of spotless white drillings, —
[September,
“ We are late, but i t ’s your fault.
Your people fired at us down the river,
and we had to turn back and come overland.”
“ You don’t suppose they saw your
f lag?”
“ No. It was hidden by the trees;
but a shot came uncomfortably near us.
It struck the water, and ricoclietted not
three yards off. A little nearer, and it
would have shortened me by a head, and
the Colonel by two feet.”
“ That would have been a sad thing
for you; but a miss, you know, is as good
as a mile,” said the Judge, evidently enjoying
the “joke.”
“ We hear Grant was in the boat that
followed yours, and was struck while at
dinner,” remarked Captain Hatch, the
Judge’s Adjutant,— a gentleman, and
about the best-looking man in the Confederacy.
“ Indeed 1 Do you believe it ? ”
“ I don’t know, of course ” ; and his
looks asked for an answer. We gave
none, for all such information is contraband.
We might have told him that
Grant, Butler, and Foster examined their
position from Mrs. Grover’s house,—about
four hundred yards distant, — two hours
after the Rebel cannon-ball danced a
break - down on the Lieutenant - General’s
dinner-table.
We were then introduced to the other
officials, — Major Henniken of the
War Department, a young man formerly
of New York, but now scorning the
imputation of being a Yankee, and Mr.
Charles Javins, of the Provost - Guard
of Richmond. This latter individual was
our shadow in Dixie. lie was of medium
height, stoutly built, with a short,
thick neck, and arms and shoulders denoting
great strength. lie looked st natural-
born jailer, and much such a character
as a timid man would not care to
encounter, except at long range of a rifle
warranted to fire twenty shots a minute,
and to hit every time.
To give us a moonlight view of the
Richmond fortifications, the Judge proposed
to start after sundown; and as it
Our 1864.] Visit to Richmond. 375
■wanted some hours of that time, we seated
ourselves on the ground, and entered
into conversation. The treatment of
our prisoners, the status of black troops,
and non-combatants, and all the questions
which have led to the suspension
of exchanges, had been good-naturedly
discussed, when the Captain, looking up
from one of the Northern papers we had
brought him, said, —
“ Do you know, it mortifies me that
you don’t hate us as we hate you ? You
kill us as Agassiz kills a fly, — because
you love us.”
“ Of course wo do. The North is being
crucified for love of the South.”
“ I f you love us so, why don't you let
us go ? ” asked the Judge, rather curtly.
“ For that very reason, — because we
love you. If we let you go, with slavery,
and your notions of ‘ empire,’ you’d run
straight to barbarism and the Devil.”
“ We ’d take the risk of that. But
let me tell you, if you are going to Mr.
Davis with any such ideas, you might as
well turn back at once. He can make
peace on no other basis than Independence.
Recognition must be the beginning,
middle, and ending of all negotiations.
Our people will accept peace on
no other terms.”
“ I think you are wrong there,” said
the Colonel. “ When I was here a year
ago, I met many of your leading men,
and they all assured me they wanted
peace and reunion, even at the sacrifice
of slavery. Within a week, a man
you venerate and love has met me at
Baltimore, and besought me to come
here, and offer Mr. Davis peace on such
conditions.”
“ That may be. Some of our old men,
who are weak in the knees, may want
peace on any terms; but the Southern
people will uot have it without Independence.
Mr. Davis knows them, and you
will find he will insist upon that. Concede
that, and we ’ll not quarrel about
minor matters.”
“ 'Ve ’ll not quarrel at all. But i t ’s
sundown, and time we were ‘ on to Richmond.’
”
“ T h a t’s the 1 Tribune ’ cry,” said the
Captain, rising; “ and I hurrah for the
‘ Tribune,’ for i t ’s honest, and —I want
my supper.”
We all laughed, and the Judge ordered
the horses. As we were about to start,
I said to him, —
“ You’ve forgotten our parole.”
“ Oh, never mind that. We ’ll attend
to that at Richmond.”
Stepping into his carriage, and unfurling
the flag of truce, he then led the
way, by a “ short cut,” across the cornfield
which divided the mansion from the
high-road. We followed in an ambulance
drawn by a pair of mules, our shadow —-
Mr. Javins — sitting between us and the
twilight, and Jack, a “ likely darky,”
almost the sole survivor of his master’s
twelve hundred slaves, ( “ De ress all
stole, Massa,—stole by you Yankees,”)
occupying the front-seat, and with a
stout whip “ working our passage” to
Richmond.
Much that was amusing and interesting
occurred during our three-hours’
journey, but regard for our word forbids
my relating it. Suffice it to say,
we saw the “ frowning fortifications,”
we “ flanked ” the “ invincible army,”
and, at ten o’clock that night, planted
our flag (against a lamp-post) in the
very heart of the hostile city. As we
alighted at the doorway of the Spotswood
Hotel, the Judge said to the Colonel,
—
“ Button your outside-coat up closely.
Your uniform must not be seen here.”
The Colonel did as he was bidden; and,
without stopping to register our names
at the office, we followed the Judge and
the Captain up to No. 60. It was a
large, square room in the fourth story,
with an unswept, ragged carpet, and
bare, white walls, smeared with soot and
tobacco-juice. Several chairs, a marbletop
table, and a pine wash-stand and
clothes-press straggled about the floor,
and in the corners were three beds, garnished
with tattered pillow-cases, and
covered with white counterpanes, grown
gray with longing for soapsuds and a
376 Our Visit to Richmond. [September,
wash-tub. The plainer and humbler of
these beds was designed for the burly
Mr. Javins; the others had been made
ready for the extraordinary envoys (not
envoys extraordinary) who, in defiance
of all precedent and the “ law of nations,”
had just then “ taken Richmond.”
A single gas-jet was burning over the
mantel-piece, and above it I saw a “ writing
on the wall ” which implied that Jane
Jackson had run up a washing-score of
fifty dollars I
I was congratulating myself on not
having to pay that woman’s laundry-bills,
when the Judge said, —
“ You want supper. What shall we
order ? ”
“ A slice of hot corn-bread would make
me the happiest man in Richmond.”
The Captain thereupon left the room,
and shortly returning, remarked,—
“ The landlord swears you ’re from
Georgia. He says none but a Georgian
would call for corn-bread at this time of
night.”
On that hint we acted, and when our
sooty attendant came in with the supper-
things, we discussed Georgia mines,
Georgia banks, and Georgia mosquitoes,
in a way that showed we had been bitten
by all of them. In half an hour it
was noised all about the hotel that the
two gentlemen the Confederacy was taking
Such excellent care of were from
Georgia.
The meal ended, and a quiet smoke
over, our entertainers rose to go. As
the Judge bade us good-night, he said
to us, —
“ In the morning you had better address
a note to Mr. Benjamin, asking the
interview with the President. I will
call at ten o’clock, and take it to him.”
“ Very well. But will Mr. Davis see
us on Sunday ? ”
“ Oh, that will make no difference.”
W H A T W E D ID T H E R E .
T iie next morning, after breakfast,
which we took in our room with Mr.
Javins, we indited a note — of which the
following is a copy — to the Confederate
Secretary of State.
“ Spotswood House, Richmond, Va.
“ Ju ly 17th, 1864.
“ Hon. J. P. Benjamin,
“ Secretary of State, etc.
“ D ear Sir , — The undersigned respectfully
solicit an interview with President
Davis.
“ They visit Richmond only as private
citizens, and have no official character or
authority; but they are acquainted with
the views of the United States Government,
and with the sentiments of the
Northern people relative to an adjustment
of the differences existing between
the North and the South, and earnestly
hope that a free interchange of views between
President Davis and themselves
may open the way to such official negotiations
as will result in restoring t e a c h
to the two sections of our distracted
country.
“ They, therefore, ask an interview
with the President, and awaiting your
reply, are
“ Truly and respectfully yours.”
This was signed by both of us ; and
when the Judge called, as he had appointed,
we sent it — together with a
commendatory letter I had received, on
setting out, from a near relative of Mr.
Davis—to the Rebel Secretary. In half
an hour Judge Ould returned, saying,—•
“ Mr. Benjamin sends you his compliments,
and will be happy to see you at
the State Department.”
We found the Secretary —• a short,
plump, oily little man in black, with a
keen black eye, a Jew face, a yellow
skin, curly black hair, closely trimmed
black whiskers, and a ponderous gold
watch - chain — in the northwest room
of the “ United States”' Custom-House.
Over the door of this room were the
words, “ State Department,” and round
its walls were hung a few maps and battle-
plans. In one eorner was a tier of
shelves filled with books,— among which
I noticed Headley’s “ History,” LossOur
1864.] Visit to Richmond. 377
ing’s “ Pictorial,” Parlun’s “ Butler,”
Greeley’s “ American Conflict,” a complete
set of the “ Rebellion Record,”
and a dozen numbers and several bound
volumes of the “ Atlantic Monthly,” —
and in the centre of the apartment was
a black-walnut table, covered with green
cloth, and filled with a multitude of
“ state - papers.” At this table sat the
Secretary. He rose as we entered, and,
as Judge Ould introduced us, took our
hands, and said, —
“ I am glad, very glad, to meet you,
Gentlemen. 1 have read your note, and ”
-— bowing to me — “ the open letter )'0u
bring from---------. Your errand commands
my respect and sympathy. Pray
be seated.”
As we took the proffered seats, the
Colonel, drawing of!' his “ duster,” and
displaying his uniform, said, —
“ We thank you for this cordial reception,
Mr. Benjamin. We trust you will
be as glad to hear us as you are to see
us.”
“ No doubt I shall be, for you come
to talk of peace. Peace is what we all
want.”
“ It is, indeed ; and for that reason we
are here to see Mr. Davis. Can we
see him, Sir ? ”
“ Do you bring any overtures to him
from your Government ? ”
“ No, Sir. We bring no overtures and
have no authority from our Government.
We state that in our note. We would
be glad, however, to know what terms
will be acceptable to Mr. Davis. If
they at all harmonize with Mr. Lincoln’s
views, we will report them to him, and
so open the door for official negotiations.”
“ Are you acquainted with Mr. Lincoln’s
views ? ”
“ One of us is, fully.”
“ Did Mr. Lincoln, in any icay, authorize
you to come here ? ”
“ No, Sir. We came with his pass, but
not by his request. We say, distinctly,
we have no official, or unofficial, authority.
We come as men and Christians,
not as diplomatists, hoping, in a frank
VOL. X IV . 2 5
talk with Mr, Davis, to discover some
way by which this war may be stopped.”
Well, Gentlemen, I will repeat what
you say to the President, and if lie follows
my advice,—-and I think he will,—
he will meet you. lie will be at church
this afternoon ; so, suppose you call here
at nine this evening. I f anything should
occur in the mean time to prevent his seeing
you, I will let you know through Judge
Ould.”
Throughout this interview the manner
of the Secretary was cordial; but with
this cordiality was a strange constraint
and diffidence, almost amounting to timidity,
which struck both my companion
and myself. Contrasting his manner with
the quiet dignity of the Colonel, I almost
fancied our positions reversed, — that,
instead of our being in his power, the
Secretary was in ours, and momently expecting
to hear some unwelcome sentence
from our lips. There is something, after
all, in moral power. Mr. Benjamin does
not possess it, nor is he a great man. He
has a keen, shrewd, ready intellect, but
not the stamina to originate, or even to
execute, any great good or great wickedness.
After a day spent in our room, conversing
with the Judge, or watching the
passers-by in the street,—I should like to
tell who they were and how they looked,
but such information is just now
contraband, — we called again, at nine
o’clock, at the State Department.
Mr. Benjamin occupied his previous
seat at the table, and at his right sat a
spare, thin-featured man, with iron-gray
hair and beard, and a clear, gray eye
full of life and vigor. He had a broad,
massive forehead, and a mouth and chin
denoting great energy and strength of
will. Ilis face was emaciated, and much
wrinkled, but his features were good,
especially his eyes,—though one of them
bore a scar, apparently made by some
sharp instrument. He wore a suit of
grayish-brown, evidently of foreign manufacture,
and, as he rose, I saw that he
was about five feet ten inches high, with
a slight, stoop in the shoulders. His manOur
‘"*'7 0 Visit to Richmond. O t b
ners were simple, easy, and quite fascinating
; and he threw an indescribable
charm into his voice, as he extended his
hand, and said to us, —
“ I am glad to see you, Gentlemen.
You are very welcome to Richmond.”
And this was the man who was President
of the United States under Franklin
Pierce, and who is now the heart,
soul, and brains of the Southern Confederacy
!
His manner put me entirely at my ease,
—the Colonel would be at his, if he stood
before Caesar, — and I replied, —•
“ We thank you, Mr. Davis. It is not
often you meet men of our clothes, and
our principles, in Richmond.”
“ Not often, — not so often as I could
wish; and I trust your coming may lead
to a more frequent and a more friendly
intercourse between the North and the
South.”
“ We sincerely hope it may.”
“ Mr. Benjamin tells me you have asked
to see me, to ” -----
And he paused, as if desiring we should
fixnsh the sentence. The Colonel replied,
—
“ Yes, Sir. We have asked this interview
in the hope that you may suggest
some way by which this war can
be stopped. Our people want peace, —
your people do, and your Congress has
recently said that you do. We have come
to ask how it can be brought about.”
“ In a very simple way. Withdraw
your armies from our territory, and peace
will come of itself. We do not seek to
subjugate you. We are not waging an
offensive war, except so far as it is offensive-
defensive,— that is, so far as we
are forced to invade you to prevent your
invading us. Let us alone, and peace
will come at once.”
“ But we cannot let you alone so long
as you repudiate the Union. That is the
one thing the Northern people will not
surrender.”
“ I know. You would deny to us what
you exact for yourselves, — the right of
self-government.”
“ No, Sir,” I remarked. “We would
[September,
deny you no natural right. But we
think Union essential to peace; and, Mr.
Davis, could two people, with the same
language, separated by only an imaginary
line, live at peace with each other
? Would not disputes constantly' arise,
and cause almost constant war between
them ? ”
“ Undoubtedly,—with this generation.
You have sown such bitterness at the
South, you have put such an ocean of
blood between the two sections, that I
despair of seeing any harmony in my
time. Our children may forget this war,
but we cannot.”
“ I think the bitterness you speak of,
Sir,” said the Colonel, “ does not really
exist. We meet and talk here as friends ;
our soldiers meet and fraternize with each
other ; and I feel sure, that, if the Union
were restored, a more friendly feeling
would arise between us than has ever
existed. The war has made us know
and respect each other better than before.
This is the view of very many
Southern men ; I have had it from many
of them, — y'our leading citizens.”
“ They are mistaken,” replied Mr.
Davis. “ They' do not understand Southern
sentiment. How can we feel anything
but bitterness towards men who
deny us our rights ? If yTou enter my
house and drive me out of it, am I not
y'our natural enemy ? ”
“ You put the case too strongly. But
we cannot fight forever; the war must
end at some time; we must finally agree
upon something; can we not agree now,
and stop this frightful carnage ? AVe are
both Christian men, Mr. Davis. Can you,
as a Christian man, leave untried any
means that may lead to peace ? ”
“ No, I cannot. I desire peace as much
as you do. I deplore bloodshed as much
as you do; but I feel that not one drop
of the blood shed in this war is on my
hands,—I can look up to my God and say
this. I tried all in my power to avert
this war. I saw it coming, and for twelve
years I worked night and day to prevent
it, but I coidd not. The North was
mad and blind ; it would not let us govOur
1864.] Visit to Richmond. S79
ern ourselves; and so the war came, and
now it must go on till the last man of this
generation falls in his tracks, and his children
seize his musket and fight his battle,
unless you acknowledge our rigid to
self-government. We are not fighting
lor slavery. We are fighting for Independence,—
and that, or extermination,
we will have.”
“ And there are, at least, four and a
half millions of us left; so you see you
have a work before y'ou,” said Mr. Benjamin,
with a decided sneer.
“ We have no wish to exterminate you,”
answered the Colonel. “ I believe what
1 have said, — that there is no bitterness
between the Northern and Southern people.
The North, I know, loves the South.
When peace comes, it will pour money
and means into your hands to repair the
waste caused by the war; and it would
now welcome you back, and forgive
you all the loss and bloodshed you have
caused. But we must crush your armies,
and exterminate your Government. And
is not that already nearly done ? You
are wholly' without money, and at the end
of your resources. Grant has shut you
up in Richmond. Sherman is before Atlanta.
Had you not, then, better accept
honorable terms while you can retain
your prestige, and save the pride of the
Southern people ? ”
Mr. Davis smiled.
“ I respect your earnestness, Colonel,
but you do not seem to understand the
situation. We are not exactly shut up
in Richmond. I f your papers tell the
truth, it is your capital that is in danger,
not ours. Some weeks ago, Grant
crossed the Iiapidan to whip Lee, and
take Richmond. Lee drove him in the
first battle, and then Grant executed
what your people call a ‘ brilliant flankmovement,’
and fought Lee again. Lee
drove him a second time, and then Grant
made another ‘ flank-movement ’ ; and so
they' kept on,—Lee whipping, and Grant
flanking, — until Grant got where he is
now. And what is the net result ? Grant
has lost seventy'-five or eighty' thousand
men, — more than Lee had at the outset,
— and is no nearer taking Richmond
than at first; and Lee, whose front has
never been broken, holds him completely
in check, and has men enough to spare
to invade Maryland, and threaten Washington
! Sherman, to be sure, is before
Atlanta; but suppose he is, and suppose
he takes it ? You know, that, the farther
he goes from his base of supplies, the
weaker he grows, and the more disastrous
defeat will be to him. And defeat
mag come. So, in a military view, I
should certainly' say' our position was
better than yours.
“ As to money': we are richer than
y'ou are. You smile; but admit that our
paper is worth nothing,—it answers as a
circulating - medium; and we hold it all
ourselves. I f every' dollar of it were lost,
we should, as we have no foreign debt,
be none the poorer. But it is worth
something; it has the solid basis of a
large cotton-crop, while yours rests on
nothing, and you owe all the world. As
to resources: we do not lack for arms
or ammunition, and we have still a
wide territory from which to gather supplies.
So, you see, we are not in extremities.
But if we were,—if we were
without money, without food, without
weapons, •— if our whole country were
devastated, and our armies crushed and
disbanded,—could we, without giving up
our manhood, give up our right to govern
ourselves? Would you not rather
die, and feel yourself a man, than live,
and be subject to a foreign power ? ”
“ From your stand-point there is force
in what y'ou say',” replied the Colonel.
“ But we did not come here to argue
with you, Mr. Davis. We came, hoping
to find some honorable way to peace;
and I am grieved to hear y'ou say what
yrou do. AVhen I have seen yrour young
men dying on the battle-field, and your
old men, women, and children starving
in their homes, I have felt I could risk
my life to save them. For that reason
I am here; and I am grieved, grieved,
that there is no hope.”
1 ‘ I know your motives, Colonel Jaquess,
and I honor you for them ; but what can
Our 380 Visit to Richmond.
I do more than I am doing ? I would
give my poor life, gladly, if it would
bring peace and good-will to the two
countries; but it would not. It is with
your own people you should labor. It
is they who desolate our homes, burn
our wheat - fields, break the wheels of
wagons carrying away our women and
children, and destroy supplies meant for
our sick and wounded. At your door
lies all the misery and the crime of this
war, — and it is a fearful, fearful account.”
“ Not all of it, Mr. Davis. I admit a
fearful account, but it is not all at outdoor.
The passions of both sides are
aroused. Unarmed men are hanged,
prisoners are shot down in cold blood, by
yourselves. Elements of barbarism are
entering the war on both sides, that should
make us—you and me, as Christian men
-— shudder to thiuk of. In God’s name,
then, let us stop it. Let us do something,
concede something, to bring about
peace. You cannot expect, with only
four and a half millions, as Mr. Benjamin
says you have, to hold out forever
against twenty millions.”
Again Mr. Davis smiled.
“ Do you suppose there are twenty
millions at the North determined to
crush us ? ”
“ I do,— to crush your government.
A small number of our people, a very
small number, are your friends,— Secessionists.
The rest differ about measures
and candidates, but are united in the determination
to sustain the Union. AVhoever
is elected in November, he must be
committed to a vigorous prosecution of
the war.”
Mr. Davis still looking incredulous,
I remarked, —
“ It is so, Sir. Whoever tells you otherwise
deceives you. I think I know
Northern sentiment, and I assure you it
is so. You know we have a system of
lyceum - lecturing in our large towns.
At the close of these lectures, it is the
custom of the people to come upon the
platform and talk with the lecturer.
This gives him an excellent opportunity
[September,
of learning public sentiment. Last winter
I lectured before nearly a hundred
of such associations, all over the North,
— from Dubuque to Bangor, — and I
took pains to ascertain the feeling of
the people. I found a unanimous determination
to crush the Rebellion and
save the Union at every sacrifice. The
majority are in favor of Mr. Lincoln, and
nearly all of those opposed to him are
opposed to him because they think he
does not fight you with enough vigor.
The radical Republicans, who go for
slave-suffrage and thorough confiscation,
are those who will defeat him, if he is
defeated. But if he is defeated before
the people, the House will elect a worse
man,.— I mean, worse for you. It is more
radical than he is, — you can see that
from Mr. Ashley’s Reconstruction Bill,—
and the people are more radical than the
House. Mr. Lincoln, I know, is about
to call out five hundred thousand more
men, and I can’t see how you can resist
much longer; but if you do, you will
only deepen the radical feeling of the
Northern people. They will now give
you fair, honorable, generous terms; but
let them suffer much more, let there be
a dead man in every house, as there is
now in every village, and they will give
you no terms, — they will insist on hanging
every Rebel south o f ------ Pardon
my terms. I mean no offence.”
“ You give no offence,” he replied,
smiling very pleasantly. “ I would n’t
have you pick your words. This is a
frank, free talk, and I like you the better
for saying what you think. Go on.”
“ I was merely going to say, that, let
the Northern people once really feel the
war,—they do not feel it yet,—and they
will insist on hanging every one of your
leaders.”
“ Well, admitting all you say, I can’t
see how it affects our position. There
are some things worse than hanging or
extermination. We reckon giving up
the right of self-government one of those
things.”
“ By self-government you mean disunion,
— Southern Independence ? ”
1864.] Our Visit to Richmond. 381
“ Yes.”
“ And slavery, you say, is no longer
an element in the contest.”
“ No, it is not, it never was an essential
element. It was only a means of bringing
other conflicting elements to an earlier
culmination. It fired the musket which
was already capped and loaded. There
are essential differences between the
North and the South that will, however
this war may end, make them two nations.”
“ You ask me to say what I think.
Will you allow me to say that 1 know the
South pretty well, and never observed
those differences ? ”
“ Then you have not used your eyes.
My sight, is poorer than yours, but I have
seen them for years.”
The laugh was upon me, and Mr. Benjamin
enjoyed it.
“ Well, Sir, be that as it may, if I understand
you, the dispute between your
government and ours is narrowed down
to this : Union or Disunion.”
“ Yes; or to put it in other words:
Independence or Subjugation.”
“ Then the two governments are irreconcilably
apart. They have no alternative
but to fight it out. But it is not so
with the people. They are tired of fighting,
and want peace; and as they bear all
the burden and suffering of the war, is
it not right they should have peace, and
have it on such terms as they like ? ”
“ I don’t understand you. Be a little
more explicit.”
“ Well, suppose the two governments
should agree to something like this: To
go to the people with two propositions:
say, Peace, with Disunion and Southern
Independence, as your proposition,—and
Peace, with Union, Emancipation, No
Confiscation, and Universal Amnesty, as
ours. Let the citizens of all the United
States (as they existed before the war)
vote ‘ Yes,’ or 1 No,’ on these two propositions,
at a special election within sixty
days. If a majority votes Disunion,
our government to be bound by it, and
to let you go in peace. If a majority
votes Union, yours to be bound by it, and
to stay in peace. The two governments
can contract in this way, and the people,
though constitutionally unable to decide
on peace or war, can elect which of the
two propositions shall govern their rulers.
Let Lee and Grant, meanwhile, agree to
an armistice. This would sheathe the
sword ; and if once sheathed, it would
never again be drawn by this generation.”
“ The plan is altogether impracticable.
If the South were only' one State, it might
work; but as it is, if one Southern State
objected to emancipation, it would nullify
the whole thing; for you are aware
the people of Virginia cannot vote slavery
out of South Carolina, nor the people
of South Carolina vote it out of Virginia.”
“ But three-fourths of the States can
amend the Constitution. Let it be done
in that way, — in any way, so that it be
done by the people. I am not a statesman
or a politician, and I do not know
just how such a plan could be carried
o u t; but you get the idea, — that the
people shall decide the question.”
“ That the majority shall decide it,
you mean. We seceded to rid ourselves
of the rule of the majority, and this would
subject us to it again.”
“ But the majority must rule finally',
either with bullets or ballots.”
“ I am not so sure of that. Neither
current events nor history shows that the
majority rules, or ever did rule. The
contrary, I think, is true. Why, Sir, the
man who should go before the Southern
people with such a proposition, with any
proposition which implied that the North
was to have a voice in determining the
domestic relations of the South, could
not live here a day. He would be hanged
to the first tree, without judge or jury.”
“ Allow me to doubt that. I think it
more likely he would be hanged, if he let
the Southern people know the majority
could n’t rule,” I replied, smiling.
“ I have no fear of that,” rejoined Mr.
Davis, also smiling most good-humoredly.
“ I give you leave to proclaim it
from every' house-top in the South.”
S82 Our Visit to
“ But, seriously, Sir, you let the majority
rule in a single State; why not
let it rule in the whole country ? ”
“ Because the States are independent
and sovereign. The country is not. It
is only a confederation of States ; or
rather it icas: it is now two confederations.”
“ Then we are not a people, — we are
only a political partnership ? ”
“ That is all.”
“ Your very name, Sir, 1 United States,’
implies that,” said Mr. Benjamin. “ But,
tell mo, are the terms you have named—
Emancipation, No Confiscation, and Universal
Amnesty — the terms which Mr.
Lincoln authorized you to olfer us ? ”
“ No, Sir, Mr. Lincoln did not authorize
me to offer you any terms. But I
think both he and the Northern people,
for the sake of peace, would assent to
some such conditions.”
“ They are very generous,” replied
Mr. Davis, for the first time during the
interview showing some angry feeling.
“ But Amnesty, Sir, applies to criminals.
We have committed no crime. Confiscation
is of no account, unless you can enforce
it. And Emancipation ! You have
already emancipated nearly two millions
of our slaves, — and if you will take
care of them, you may emancipate the
rest. I had a few when the war began.
1 was of some use to them; they never
were of any to me. Against their will
you 1 emancipated ’ them ; and you may
‘ emancipate ’ every negro in the Confederacy,
but roe will be free ! We will
govern ourselves. We will do it, if we
have to see every Southern plantation
sacked, and every Southern city in
flames.”
“ I see, Mr. Davis, it is useless to continue
this conversation,” I replied; “ and
you will pardon us, if we have seemed to
press our views with too much pertinaci-
I v. Wc love the old flag, and that must
be our apology for intruding upon you
at all.”
“ Y'ou have not intruded upon mo,”
he replied, resuming his usual manner.
“ I am glad to have met you, both. I
Richmond. [September,
once loved the old flag as well as you d o ;
I would have died for i t ; but now it is to
me only the emblem of oppression.”
“ I hope the day may never come, Mr.
Davis, when I say that,” said the Colonel.
A half- hour’s conversation on other
topics — not of public interest — ensued,
and then we rose to go. As we did so,
the Rebel President gave me his hand,
‘and, bidding me a kindly good-bye, expressed
the hope of seeing me again in
Richmond in happier times,—when peace
should have returned ; but with the Colonel
his parting was particularly cordial.
Taking his hand in both of his, he said
to him, —
“ Colonel, I respect your character and
your motives, and I wish you well, — I
wish you every good I can wish you consistently
with the interests of the Confederacy.”
The quiet, straightforward bearing and
magnificent moral courage of our “ fighting
parson” had evidently impressed Mr.
Davis very favorably.
As we were leaving the room, lie added,
—
“ Say to Mr. Lincoln from me, that
I shall at any time be pleased to receive
proposals for peace on the basis of
our Independence. I t will be useless
to approach me with any other.”
When we went out, Mr. Benjamin
called Judge Ould, who had been waiting
during the whole interview — two
hours— at the other end of the hall, and
we passed down the stairway together.
As I put my arm within that of the Judge,
he said to me, —
“ Well, what is the result ? ”
“ Nothing but war,—war to the knife.”
“ Ephraim is joined to his idols, —
let him alone,” added the Colonel, solemnly.
I should like to relate the incidents
of the next day, when we visited Castle
Thunder, Libby' Prison, and the hospitals
occupied by our wounded ; but the
limits of a magazine-article will not permit.
1 can only say that at sundown we
passed out of the Rebel lines, and at ten
1864.] Reviews and Literary Notices. 383
o’clock that night stretched onr tired
limbs on the “ downy ” cots in General
Butler’s tent, thankful, devoutly thankful,
that we were once again under the
folds of the old flag.
Thus ended our visit to Richmond.
I have endeavored to sketth it faithfully.
The conversation with Mr. Davis I took
down shortly after entering the Union
lines, and I have tried to report his exact
language, extenuating nothing, and coloring
nothing that he said. Some of his
sentences, as I read them over, appear
stilted and high-flown, but they did not
sound so when uttered. As listened to,
they seemed the simple, natural language
of his thought. He spoke deliberately,
apparently weighing every' word, and
knowing well that all he said would be
given to the public.
He is a man of peculiar ability. Our
interview with him explained to me why,
with no money and no commerce, with
nearly every one of their important cities
in our hands, and with an army greatly
inferior in numbers and equipment to
ours, the Rebels have held out so long.
It is because of the sagacity, energy,
and indomitable will of Jefferson Davis.
Without him the Rebellion would crumble
to pieces in a day; with him it may
continue to be, even in disaster, a power
that will tax the whole energy and resources
of the nation.
The Southern masses want peace.
Many of the Southern leaders want it,
— both my companion and I, by correspondence
and intercourse with them,
know this; but there can be no peace
so long as Mr. Davis controls the South.
Ignoring slavery, he himself states the issue,—
the only issue with him,—Union, or
Disunion. That is it. We must conquer,
or be conquered. We can negotiate only
with the bayonet. We can have peace
and union only by putting forth ail our
strength, crushing the Southern armies,
and overthrowing the Southern government.