1887.] A Suppressed Chapter of History. 435
A SUPPRESSED CHAPTER OF HISTORY.
Among the many disclosures which
are now being made in regard to the
men and events of our recent civil war,
none are more interesting than those
which relate to the eminent man who
guided the country through that great
crisis. Every one of them exhibits him
in some new aspect, and they all deepen
the impression that he was a “ providential
man,” peculiarly adapted and specially
commissioned to do the vast work
which he performed in American history.
I t was my good fortune to know
him well, and to be, at an early period,
the depositary of Iris confidential views
as to the terms of peace to he accorded
to the revolted States.1 These terms
were at the time kept secret, at his special
request, but there is now no reason
why they should be denied publicity.
They disclose his kindly feeling towards
the South, and I think that nothing related
of him more fully reveals the genuine
magnanimity, rectitude, and goodness
of his character. In order to make
my narrative clear, it is necessary to
relate the circumstances which led Mr.
Lincoln to communicate to me his views
on this momentous subject.
In May, 1863, I had been on a visit
of several weeks at the headquarters
of General Rosecrans, at Murfreesboro,
Term., when the general one day informed
me that one of his officers had
applied to him for a furlough, with permission
to go into the Confederate lines.
The officer was Colonel James F. Jaquess,
of the 73d Illinois Infantry, known
as the “ Fighting Parson,” from his bravery,
and the fact that before the war he
had been a prominent clergyman of the
1 This article is properly a supplement to
one entitled Our Visit to Richmond, which appeared
in the Atlantic Monthly for September,
1864. The present paper relates some circumstances
that could not then he made public ;
Methodist Church. He believed that by
acting on the Methodist element at the
South he could bring about a peace that
would be honorable and acceptable to
both sections, and General Rosecrans
sympathized enough with his views to
ask the President to grant him the desired
furlough. Mr. Lincoln promptly
telegraphed, declining the request, but
asking a fuller statement of the colonel’s
project by letter. Then General Rosecrans
suggested that I should visit the
President, with a letter from himself,
and by personal representations endeavor
to secure the furlough. I consented,
and set out on the following day with
the proposed letter from the general,
and another from Colonel Jaquess to
Mr. Lincoln, with whom he had been on
terms of considerable intimacy for many
years.
I was already well acquainted with
Mr. Lincoln, and knowing the demands
upon his time, and supposing that my
interview would be of some length, I
sent the two letters to him by a messenger,
on my arrival in Washington, with
a request that he would name an hour
when he could conveniently give me an
interview. The answer which came to
me, scrawled upon a small card, was,
“ Come at half past seven this evening,
and I ’ll be glad to see you. A. L.”
The letter from Jaquess to the President
he had given to me open, asking
that I would read it. Having done
so, I hesitated about delivering it, lest
what struck me as its half-fanatical tone,
of which there was not a trace in the
colonel’s conversation, should prejudice
Mr. Lincoln against his request. Howand
it recounts the terms to he offered the
Confederacy, which were written and put into
type for the 1864 article, but were suppressed
by Mr. Lincoln, on his revising the proof of it
on the eve of its publication. — E. K.
436 A Suppressed Chapter of History. [April,
ever, as frankness seemed to demand
that the President should know exactly
of what “ manner of spirit ” Jaquess
was, I dispatched it with the other letter.
I t read as follows : —
Murfreesboro, Ten s . , May 23, 1863.
Hon. A. Lincoln, President ZJ. S. A . :
My dear Sir, •— This, with other
papers, will he handed you by Mr. Gilmore,
who has been introduced to me
by General Eosecrans. Mr. G. will explain
to you in full what I propose to
do. Meanwhile, should you feel that
my proposition is too strong, and cannot
be realized, I would say, I may not be
able to reach the specific object stated in
the proposition, but the mission cannot
fail to accomplish great good.
I t is a fact well known to me and others,
perhaps to yourself, that much sympathy
exists in the minds of many good
people, both in this country and England,
for the South, on the ground of
their professed piety. They say, “ Mr.
Davis is a praying man,” “ Many of liis
people are devotedly pious,” etc., etc.
Now, you will admit that, if they hear
me, I have gained the point. On the
other hand, if Mr. Davis and his associates
in rebellion refuse me, coming to
them in the name of the Lord on a mission
of peace, the question of their piety
is settled at once and forever. Should
I be treated with violence, and cast into
prison, shot, or hanged, -—- which may be
part of my mission, — then the doom
of the Southern Confederacy is sealed
on earth and in heaven forever. My
dear Mr. Lincoln will excuse me when I
say that I am ready for either emergency,
and though not Samson, I should,
like him, slay more at my death than in
all my life at the head of my regiment.
No, the mission cannot fail. God’s
hand is in it. I am not seeking a martyr’s
crown, but simply to meet the duty
that has been laid upon me.
I have talked freely with Mr. Gilmore,
and he -will explain to you more
fully if you desire. To him I would refer
you, and with my best wishes and
prayers, I am, dear sir,
Your obedient servant,
J ames F. J aquess,
Colonel Com’d’g 73d Illinois Infantry.
At the appointed time I found Mr.
Lincohi closeted with Reverdy Johnson,
and, my name being sent in by Mr. Nicolay,
I took a seat in his room, and waited
the President’s leisure. Soon Mr.
Johnson passed out, and then Mr. Lincoln
appeared in the doorway. Extending
his hand to me, he said, “ Sorry to
have kept you wraiting. Come in.”
Then, as I entered his room, he added,
“ Do you know, I can’t talk with you
about that Jaquess matter ? ”
“ Why not, s ir? ” I asked, somewhat
surprised.
“ Because,” he answered, “ I happen
to be President of the United States.
We can make no overtures to the Rebels.
If they want peace, all they have to do
is to lay down their arms. But never
mind about th a t; you’ve been to Tennessee,
and I want to see you. So, sitdown,
and tell me all you know, — it
won’t take you long.”
I t did take me fully three hours. As
I rose to go, he inquired, “ When do you
return home ? ”
“ In the morning, sir,” I replied.
“ Can’t you stay another day,” he
said, “ and come to see me to-morrow
evening ? I want to think more of that
Jaquess matter.”
I assented, and called on him again at
the time named. He was in a more anxious
mood than I had ever seen him.
He wore a fagged, dejected look, and
for a time indulged in none of his accustomed
raillery and jocoseness. His
concern was for Grant, who was before
Vicksburg with numbers inferior to
Pemberton and Johnston. His fear was
that Johnston had cut Grant’s communications,
for he had not heard from him
for more than twenty-four hours. As
1887.] A Suppressed Chapter of History. 437
dispatch after dispatch came in from
the War Department, he opened and
glanced over them, then laid them down,
saying, in a weary way, “ Nothing from
Grant y e t! Why don’t we hear from
Grant ? ” Had the life of one of his
sons been trembling in the balance, he
could not have shown greater anxiety.
I felt too much sympathy with him to
attempt to divert his mind to the business
I had come about, and it was a full
hour before he alluded to the subject.
Then suddenly he said, “ Well, I ’ve
kept you over to consider about that
Jaquess matter. I ’ve about concluded
to let him go. My only fear is that he
may compromise me ; but I don’t see
how he can if I refuse to see him, and
he goes altogether on his own responsibility.
But he must understand distinctly
that I have nothing to do with his
project, either directly or indirectly. If
the impression should go abroad that I
had, it might complicate matters badly.”
“ I understand, sir,” I remarked. “ It
might be construed into a guasi-acknowledgment
of the Rebel government, and
give France and England the pretext
they want for recognizing the Confederacy.”
“ Partly that,” he answered, “ and
partly its effect on the North. The
Copperheads would be sure to say I had
shown the white feather, and resorted to
back-door diplomacy to get out of a bad
scrape. This, whether true or not,
would discourage loyal people. You see,
I don’t want to be like the dog that
crossed the brook with a piece of meat
in his mouth, and dropped it to catch its
enlarged shadow in the water. I want
peace ; I want to stop this terrible waste
of life and property; and I know Jaquess
well, and see that, working in the
way he proposes, he may be able to bring
influences to bear upon Davis that he
cannot well resist, and thus pave the
way for an honorable settlement; but I
can’t afford to discourage our friends
and encourage our enemies, and so, perhaps,
make it more difficult to save the
Union.”
“ I appreciate your position, sir,” I
said; “ but what weight will Jaquess
have, if he goes without some, at least
implied, authority from you ? ”
“ He may have much,” he replied,
drawing from his side pocket the letter
to him from Jaquess, and glancing over
it. “ He proposes here to speak to them
in the name of the Lord, and he says he
feels God’s hand is in it, and He has laid
the duty upon him. Now, if he feels
that he has that kind of authority, he
can’t fail to affect the element on which
he expects to operate, and that Methodist
element is very powerful at the
South.”
“ Why, sir ! ” I remarked. “ I hesitated
about delivering you that letter.
I feared you would think Jaquess fanatical.”
“ If you had not delivered it,” he answered,
“ I would not let him go. Such
talk in you or me might sound fanatical;
but in Jaquess it is simply natural and
sincere. And I am not at all sure he
is n’t right. God selects his own instruments,
and sometimes they are queer
ones ; for instance, He chose me to steer
the ship through a great crisis.”
I was glad to see him relapsing into
his usual badinage, but, desiring to keep
him to the subject, I said; “ Then,
sir, you decide to give Jaquess the furlough,
but refuse to grant him an interview.
He will need to know your views
about peace. What shall I write him
are the terms you will grant the Rebels?
”
“ Don’t write him at all, — write to
Rosecrans. I ’ve been thinking what
had better be said. My views are peace
on any terms consistent with the abolition
of slavery and the restoration of
the Union. Is not that enough to say
to Jaquess ? He can do no more than
open the door for further negotiations,
which would have to be conducted with
me here, in a regular way. Let Rose*
488
crans tell him that we shall he liberal on
collateral points ; that the country will
do everything for safety, nothing for revenge.”
“ Do you mean, sir,” I asked, “ that
as soon as the Rebels lay down their
arms you will grant a general amnesty
? ”
“ I do ; and I will say to you that, individually,
I should be disposed to make
compensation for the slaves ; hut I doubt
if my cabinet or the country would favor
that. What do you think public
opinion would be about it ? Nicolay
tells me you have recently lectured all
over the North; you must have heard
people talk.”
u I have, sir, almost everywhere; and
my opinion is that not one voter in ten
would pay the South a dollar. Still, I
have observed very little hatred or bitterness
in any quarter.”
“ No,” he answered; “ the feeling is
against slavery, not against the South.
The war has educated our people into
abolition, and they now deny that slaves
can be property. But there are two
sides to that question : one is ours, the
other the Southern side ; and those people
are just as honest and conscientious
in their opinion as we are in ours.
They think they have a moral and legal
right to their slaves, and until very recently
the North has been of the same
opinion ; for two hundred years the
whole country has admitted it, and regarded
and treated the slaves as property.
Now, does the mere fact that the country
has come suddenly to a contrary
opinion give it the right to take the
slaves from their owners without compensation
? The blacks must be freed.
Slavery is the bone we are fighting over.
I t must be got out of the way, to give us
permanent peace ; and if we have to
fight this war till the South is subjugated,
then I think we shall be justified
in freeing the slaves without compensation.
But in any settlement arrived at
before they force things to that extrem-
[ April,
ity, is it not right and fair that we should
make payment for the slaves ? ”
“ If I were a slaveholder,” I answered,
“ I should probably say that it
was: but you, sir, have to deal with
things as they are, and I think that if
you were to sound public sentiment at
the North you Would find it utterly opposed
to any compromise with the South.
A vast majority would regard any compensation
as a price paid for peace, and
not for the slaves.”
“ So I think,” he said, “ and therefore
I fear we can come to no adjustment.
I fear the war must go on till
North and South have both drunk of the
cup to the very dregs, ■— till both have
worked out in pain, and grief, and bitter
humiliation the sin of two hundred
years. It has seemed to me that God
so wills i t ; and the first gleam I have
had of a hope to the contrary is in this
letter of Jaquess. This thing, irregular
as it is, may mean that the higher
powers are about to take a hand in this
business, and bring about a settlement.
I know if I were to say this out loud,
nine men in ten would think I had gone
crazy. But — you are a thinking man
— just consider it. Here is a man,
cool, deliberate, God-fearing, of exceptional
sagacity and worldly wisdom, who
undertakes a project that strikes you and
me as utterly chimerical: he attempts
to bring about, single-handed and on his
own hook, a peace between two great
sections. Moreover, he gets it into his
head that God has laid this work upon
him, and he is willing to stake his life
upon that conviction. The impulse upon
him is overpowering, as it was upon Luther,
when he said, ‘ God help me. I
can do no otherwise.’ Now, how do
you account for this ? What produces
this feeling in him ? ”
“ An easy answer would be to say
that Jaquess is a fanatic.”
“ But,” he replied, “ he is very far
from being a fanatic. He is remarkably
level-headed; I never knew a man more
A Suppressed Chapter of History.
1887.] A Suppressed Chapter of History. 439
so. Can you account for it except on
his own supposition, that God is in it ?
And, if that is so, something will come
out of i t ; perhaps not what Jaquess expects,
hut what will be of service to the
right. So, though there is risk about
it, I shall let him go.”
“ There certainly, sir, is risk to Ja quess.
He will go without a safe-conduct,
and so mil be technically a spy.
The Rebel leaders may choose to regard
him in that light. If they don’t like his
terms of peace, they may think that the
easiest way to be rid of the subject. In
that event, could n’t you in some way
interfere to protect him ? ”
“ I don’t see how I could,” he replied,
“ without appearing to have a hand in
the business. And if Jaquess has his
duties, I have mine. What you suggest
reminds me of a man out West, who
was not over-pious, but rich, and built a
church for the poor peojole of his neighborhood.
When the church was finished,
the people took it into their heads
that it needed a lightning-rod, and they
went to the rich man, and asked him for
money to help pay for it. ‘ Money for
a lightning-rod!’ he said. ‘Not a red
cent! If the Lord wants to thunder
down his own house, let him thunder it
down, and be d------ d.’ ”
“ So,” I said, laughing, “ you propose
to let the Lord take care of Jaquess ? ”
“ I do,” he answered. “ His evident
sincerity will protect him. I have no
fear for him whatever. But I shall be
anxious to hear of him, and I wish you
would send me the first word you get.
In writing to Rosecrans, omit what I
have said about paying for the slaves.
The time lias not come to talk about
that. Let him say what he thinks best
to Colonel Jaquess ; but the colonel must
not understand he has the terms from
me. We want peace, but we can make
no overtures to the Rebels. They already
know that the country would welcome
them back, and treat them generously
and magnanimously.”
“ To avoid any possibility of misunderstanding,
sir,” I remarked, “ would
it not be well for you to write to Rosecrans
also ? ”
“ Perhaps it would,” he answered.
“ I think I wiU.”
I t was near midnight when I rose to
go. As I did so, he said, “ Don’t go'
yet. I shall stay here until I get something
from Grant.”
I resumed my seat, and half an hour
later the dispatch came in. Then the
worn, weary man took my hand, saying,
“ Good-by. God bless you,” and I went
to my quarters.
I wrote at once to Generals Rosecrans
and Garfield, and soon afterwards had a
response from Major Frank S. Bond, aid
to Rosecrans, dated Murfreesboro, June
4, 1863. A portion of it was as follows
: “ Your letter to the general and
inclosure to Garfield & Co. were both
duly received, and will probably be acknowledged
by the parties to whom they
were addressed. A letter has also been
received [the one promised by Mr. Lincoln]
as to the matter of Dr. J., of similar
import to that stated in your letter.
On receipt of this letter I sent for Colonel
J., and had a talk with him. He
says he does not wish to start at once, if
the army is to move. He also asks,
would he be warranted in saying that
the government would, under certain circumstances,
be willing to pay a fa ir
price to the smaller slave-owners — say,
to the owners of five slaves and under ;
also, would they allow the leaders to
leave the country without molestation, or
would they make it compulsory. Please
write me your views on these points.”
All letters and conversations which
are quoted in the course of this article,
I copy from the originals, or from minutes
made by me at the time, but of my
reply to this letter I either did not keep
a copy, or have mislaid it. To the best
of my recollection, the substance of my
answer, addressed to Major Bond, or
direct to General Rosecrans, was that
440 A Suppressed Chapter of History.
Jaquess had better not go into details
in his proffers to the Rebels; that, conceding
union and emancipation, they
would find Mr. Lincoln most liberal on
all collateral matters ; also, that Colonel
Jaquess, on liis return, had better report
to General Rosecrans, and not attempt
to communicate • direct with Mr.
Lincoln, there being strong reasons why
the President should have, at the time,
no intercourse with him.
The next tidings I had of Colonel
Jaquess were in a letter to me from
General Garfield, dated Murfreesboro,
June 17, 1863. He said, “ Colonel Ja quess
has gone on his mission. The
President approved it, though, of course,
did not make it an official matter. There
are some very curious facts relating to
his mission, which would particularly interest
your friend Judge Edmonds, and
which I hope to tell you of some day.
I t will be sufficient for me to say that
enough of the mysterious is in it to give
me almost a superstitious feeling of half
faith, and certainly a very great interest
in his work. He is most solemnly in
earnest, and has great confidence in the
result of his mission.”
I had no further tidings of Colonel
Jaquess until the following November,
though I was in frequent correspondence
with General Garfield, and would have
heard of him had Jaquess reported, as
was expected, to General Rosecrans. Nor
did Mr. Lincoln hear from him. I was
twice in Washington during the summer,
and on each occasion saw the President,
who, at our last interview, expressed
much concern about Jaquess. He feared
some evil had befallen him, and regretted
having let him go, for just then such
men could be poorly spared by the country.
My own opinion was that Jaquess
had been detained by the Confederates ;
but about the middle of November I received
a letter from him which showed
that he had returned in safety. He subsequently
told me that, on leaving Murfreesboro,
he went direct to Baltimore,
[April,
where he reported to General Schenck,
who, on learning Iris purpose, forwarded
him on to Portress Monroe. There he
explained to General Dix his object in
going into the Confederacy, and he, after
some delay (probably to secure instructions
from Washington), allowed him to
go on board a flag-of-truce boat, which
was about to start for the Confederate
lines. He was in his uniform, but was
courteously treated, and a message from
him to General Longstreet was promptly
conveyed to that officer. Before the
return of the boat General Longstreet
came down to meet him, received him
cordially, and invited him to his own
quarters. There he met many of the
Confederate leaders, with all of whom
he discussed the situation frankly and
freely. To all of them he said, “ Lay
down your arms, go back to your allegiance,
and the country will deal kindly
and generously by you.” He could not
say more, for he was restricted from going
into details. From all he had, in
effect, the same answer : “ We are tired
of the war. We are willing to give up
slavery. We know it is gone ; but so
long as our government holds out, we
must stand by it. We cannot betray
it and each other.” It was tins sentiment
of loyalty to their government
which made the Southern people follow
so blindly the lead of Jefferson Davis ;
and it throws upon him the responsibility
of the two years of carnage that followed.
I t will also appear, farther on
in this paper, that it was altogether owing
to the blind obstinacy and insane
ambition of that man that the Southern
people came out of the war, stripped,
without payment, of their slaves, and
with scarcely more that they could call
their own than the ground they trod
upon.
Colonel Jaquess failed to gain audience
of Mr. Davis, and was told that it
would be useless to approach him without
having distinct proposals from Mr.
Lincoln. But if he brought those, and
1887.] -A- Suppressed Chapter of History. 441
they were on a liberal basis, they would,
without doubt, be accepted. To obtain
more definite proposals Jacquess returned
to the North. His subsequent
movements are related in his letter to
me, which I have mentioned as being
received about the middle of November.
It was as follows : —
Chattanooga, Tenn., November 4, 1863.
J. R. Gilmore, E sq. :
Mr very dear Sir , — I entered
upon my mission, passed into the Confederate
lines, met a most cordial reception,
was received by those to whom
my mission was directed as a visitant
from the other world, and was strongly
urged not to cease my efforts till the
end was accomplished. I obtained some
very valuable information, which appears
more so to me now, since events have
transpired to which I need not now refer.
I returned to Baltimore, with a view
to communicating with President Lincoln.
I wrote him — without stating
that I had been within the enemy’s lines
— “ that I had valuable information.
Can I have permission to communicate
it ? If so, how, — by telegraph, mail,
or in person ? I await an answer at
Barnum’s Hotel, Baltimore, Md.”
I waited there two weeks ; no answer
came. General Schenck, to whom I had
made known my business when outward
bound, was absent. I did not feel at
liberty to report to any one else.
At this time I learned from parties
here that a battle, at or near this place,
would be fought soon, and that my regiment
very much desired me to be with
them. I hastened to join them, which I
did just in time to be in the most desperate
and bloody battle of the war. I
lost over two hundred of my men, nineteen
commissioned officers in killed and
wounded, and I had two horses shot under
me. I was not touched.
I cannot perceive why President L.
should decline any communication with
me. I can give him some most valuable
information ; no one else need know it,
and he be uncommitted.
Generals Rosecrans and Garfield are
gone, and there are no others here with
whom I feel free to communicate. I
would be most thankful for the privilege
of prosecuting this work further, — feel
that I ought to do it, that great good
would result from it. I find my way
perfectly clear on the other side of the
line. My only trouble is on this side.
I can do our cause more good in one
month, in my own way, than I can here
in twelve. More anon.
Yours truly, J . F. J aqttess,
Colonel 73d Reg. III. Vols.
This letter I received as I was about
to set out on a lecturing tour, which
would not leave three consecutive days
at my disposal until the following April.
Consequently, I could not go to Washington
; and writing to Mr. Lincoln
seemed to be useless, for if he had not
answered Jaquess, it was to be presumed
he would not correspond with any one
on that subject. Besides, I could tell
him nothing till I had seen the colonel.
This I wrote to Jaquess, suggesting that
he should apply to General Thomas,
who knew and approved of his first visit,
and would, no doubt, depute some trusty
person to go to Mr. Lincoln, report what
Jaquess had to communicate, and obtain
a new furlough. I suggested also that
he should not again attempt direct access
to Mr. Lincoln, unless he could bring to
him definite proposals of surrender from
the Rebel leaders.
To this letter Jaquess replied that he
would wait until I could go to Washington,
as it was necessary he should know
more definitely Mr. Lincoln’s views before
he went again into the Confederacy;
and the extreme caution the President
had shown convinced him that he would
not talk to any stranger as freely as he
had talked, and probably would again
talk, to me.
I was not able to visit Washington till
442 A Suppressed Chapter o f History. [April,
early in the following May. Then, about
the first question I asked of Mr. Lincoln
was, why he had not replied to Colonel
Jaquess’s letter.
“ I never received his letter,” was the
unexpected answer. The person to whom
it had come had not thought it of sufficient
importance to bring it to the notice
of the President. I then handed him
Jaquess’s letter to me of November 4,
1863. He read it carefully, and then
said, “ H e ’s got something worth hearing.
What a pity it is they did n’t give
me that letter ! ”
“ I t ’s not too late, sir,” I remarked.
Those people are ripe for peace. Let
Jaquess go again. There is no telling
what he may accomplish.”
Without a word, he turned about on
Ins chair, and on a small card wrote as
follows: —
To whom it may concern:
The bearer, Colonel James P. Jaquess,
73d Illinois, has leave of absence until
further orders. A. L incoln.
When he handed this card to me I
said, “ I will send this at once to General
Thomas, and write to Jaquess to
come to me at my home in Boston.
Then I will send to you, through General
Garfield, a full report of Jaquess’s
doings within the Rebel lines.”
“ All right,” he answered. “ Garfield
will be discreet. Have you seen
him ? ”
“ Not yet, sir ; but he is here, and I
can see him to-day. However, it seems
to me, it would be vastly better for you
to talk with Jaquess. Would it not do
for me to bring him here in citizen’s
clothes ? I t could be managed with absolute
secrecy.”
“ No doubt,” he answered, “ but the
fact would exist; and I could n’t deny
it, if it should prove inconvenient.”
“ Do you desire I should name any
more definite terms to Jaquess ? ”
“ What did you tell me, some time
ago, that Rosecrans wrote to you about
pay to the small slave-owners ? ”
“ His aid, Major Bond, wrote to me
that Jaquess asked if you would pay the
owners of five slaves and under, and if
the leaders would be allowed to leave
the country without molestation.”
“ Let him tell them all to stay at
home ; and I think I could manage the
five slaves, — perhaps more. You see,
Chickamauga has taught the country
something. People don’t talk so much
about the Confederacy being a shell;
perhaps it is, but i t ’s an awful hard
shell to crack. You can say to Jaquess
that you are satisfied we will grant such
terms, but don’t say I distinctly offer
them. He might construe that into
some sort of authority.”
I t was not till the 13th of June that
I heard from Colonel Jaquess. Then I
received a torn sheet, written by him in
pencil on the 10th of the same month,
from one of the battle-fields about Kenesaw
Mountain, in which he said that he
was ready to go again, and would see
me in Boston about the first of July. I
at once wrote to Mr. Lincoln, apprising
him of this, and adding that the more I
thought of it, the more it seemed to me
important that Jaquess should have fuller
and more definite instructions. I hoped
also that he would change his mind about
giving him a personal interview. Should
I not bring Jaquess on to Washington,
and he then decide what to do hi the
premises ?
This letter I sent open, to General
Garfield, with a note requesting him to
read it, and urge my views vqion the
President. Answer came from Garfield
in an appendix to a letter of five pages,
which he had written me on other subjects
(June 19, 1863). The appendix
was as follows : —
“ I have delayed sending this till I
could see the President in reference to
Jaquess ; and after two ineffectual attempts,
I saw him, and talked with him.
There were other persons in the room,
1887.]
and we could not talk freely, so he
summed it all up by saying, ‘ Tell Gilmore
to bring Jaquess here, and I will
see him. Of course it should be done
very quietly.’ ”
My next communication on this subject
was a telegram from Colonel Ja quess,
dated “ Barnum’s Hotel, Baltimore,
June 30th,” which was as follows :
“ Can you come to Baltimore and Washington
? I t is important.”
As soon thereafter as possible I went
to Baltimore, and met Colonel Jaquess.
He informed me that he had brought dispatches
from General Sherman to Washington,
and, being there, had sent in his
name to Mr. Lincoln, who had declined
to see him, but advised his seeing me in
Boston. He had telegraphed to me to
come on, he said, because lie was fearful
that some unforeseen difficulty had
arisen in the way of his return into the
Confederacy. This apprehension I quieted
by assuring him that Mr. Lincoln
was more anxious for peace than any
one in the country.
We took the next train for Washington,
and I called at once upon Mr. Lincoln.
About his first remark was that
on the very day he had told Garfield to
write me that he would see Jaquess,
General Schenck had called upon him
with some volunteer advice as to the
terms he should offer the Rebels through
Colonel Jaquess. On subsequent inquiry
he had learned that Schenck had spoken
of the subject freely and everywhere.
“ This,” he said, “ may greatly embarrass
me. I therefore refused to see Ja quess,
and shall countermand his furlough,
and send him back to his regiment.”
“ I am very sure, sir,” I said, “ that
Jaquess has never disclosed his business,
except, perhaps, when it was necessary
in order to get through the lines.”
“ No doubt,” he said. “ I don’t question
his discretion ; but the fact that he
has had to mention it at all shows the
thing should not go any further. The
448
whole business is irregular, and had better
not be proceeded with.”
“ That is, of course, for you to decide,
s ir ; but will you allow me five
minutes by a slow watch ? ”
“ Yes,” he answered, “ te n ; and if
yon are very entertaining, I ’ll give you
twenty.”
Then, as briefly as I could, I spoke
of the universal impression existing at
the North that some honorable peace
could be made with the South ; and I
said that if liberal terms were offered to
the Confederacy, and were refused, it
would remove that impression, kill the
peace party, and secure his reelection to
the presidency. The country was so
thoroughly tired of the war that it
would welcome any peace that would
preserve the Union. The Democrats
would promise such a peace, and the result
would be that their candidate would
be elected, and the Union would go to
pieces. On the other hand, if Jaquess
went, and Davis should refuse to negotiate
— as he probably would — except
on the basis of Southern independence,
that fact alone would unite the North,
reelect him, and thus save the Union.
“ Then,” he said, “ you would fight
the devil with fire? You would get
that declaration from Davis, and use it
against him ? ”
“ I would, sir,” I answered. “ I would
spread it wherever the English language
is spoken; and in thirty days there
would not be a peace man at the North,
except in the Copperhead party. But 1
would deal squarely with Davis. I would
offer him terms so liberal that, if he rejected
them, he would stand condemned
before the civilized world.”
Until this time Mr. Lincoln had sat
with one of his long legs upon the corner
of the table, but now he drew the
leg down, and leaned slightly forward,
looking directly into my eyes, but with
an absent, far-away gaze, as if unconscious
of my presence. Thus he sat for
fully a couple of minutes, in absolute
A Suppressed Chapter of History.
444 A Suppressed Chapter of History.
silence. Then, relapsing into his usual
manner, he said, “ There is something
in what you say. But Jaquess could n’t
do it, -— he could n’t draw Davis’s lire ;
he is too honest. You are the man for
that business.”
Not stopping to be amused by his
equivocal compliment, I replied, “ Excuse
me, sir, if I differ with you. His
very honesty and sincerity exactly fit
him for the business. Davis is astute
and wary, but the colonel’s transparent
honesty would disarm him completely.”
“ Have you suggested this to Ja quess
? ”
“ No, sir.”
“ Well, if you propose it to him, he
will tell you he won’t have anything to
do with the business. He feels that he is
acting as God’s servant and messenger,
and he would recoil from anything like
political finesse. But if Davis should
make such a declaration, the country
should know of i t ; and I can see that,
coming from him now, when everybody
is tired of the war, and so many think
some honorable settlement can be made,
it might be of vital importance to us.
But I tell you that not Jaquess, but you,
are the man for that business.”
“ Ah ! I see, sir,” I remarked. “ You
propose that I shall go upon this mission.”
“ No, I do not,” he answered. “ I do
not propose anything. I can’t propose
anything about such a business. I can
only say that I will give you a pass into
the Rebel lines, and then — ask Jaquess
to pray for you.”
“ When I might be past praying
for ! ” I rejoined. “ This is a new and
unexpected thought to me, Mr. Lincoln.
Will you allow me to consider it, and
talk it over with Mr. Chase and General
Garfield ? ”
“ Certainly,” he answered. “ Talk
with them, and bring them both here
with you this evening. I should like to
confer with them myself, — with Chase
particularly. Tell him so.”
[April,
After explaining the position of things
to Colonel Jaquess, I called upon General
Garfield, and explained the subject
to him fully. His opinion upon it may
be condensed into a very few words : “ I
never had much faith in the power of
the ‘ Methodist Church South ’ to control
Davis ; but I tell you, you’ve got
the idea now that will dethrone him.
Let him make that declaration, and
there won’t be an honest peace man at
the North. Come, I will go with you
to see Mr. Chase.”
With Mr. Chase we went over the
whole ground, and he expressed the decided
opinion that, in view of the state
of feeling in the North, it was of the
first importance that liberal terms should
be at once offered to Davis, and, if he
declined them, that the country should
know the fact. Garfield had an important
engagement that evening, but, after
I had dined with Mr. Chase, the latter
went with me to the White House. This
he did without hesitation, though, only
a few days before, he had resigned from
the Treasury Department, and it was
currently reported that relations between
him and Mr. Lincoln were somewhat
strained. I judged, however, that if
any feeling existed, it was entirely on
the side of Mr. Chase, for Mr. Lincoln’s
manner to him was most cordial, — had
the frank trustfulness that he showed
only to those, who had Iris entire confidence.
Before we were seated he said,
“ Ah, Chase, I am glad you’ve come ;
but where is Garfield't ”
“ He had an engagement with a
client,” said Mr. Chase. “ He is eking
out his income with a little practice in
the Supreme Court.”
“ Well, I wanted you particularly,”
said Mr. Lincoln. “ This is a delicate
and important business, and I don’t
want to stir in it without your advice.”
“ I know you are sincere in that expression,
Mr. Lincoln,” said Mr. Chase,
“ and I feel honored by it.”
“ Well, sit down, both of you,” said
1887.] A Suppressed Chapter of History. 445
Mr. Lincoln, “ and let us get to business.
Now, Mr. Gilmore, have you decided
to ask me for a pass into the
Rebel lines ? ”
“ I have, sir,” I answered, “ on the condition
that you allow me to make such
overtures to Davis as will put him entirely
in the wrong if he rejects them.”
“ Well,” said Mr. Lincoln, “ Mr.
Chase and I will talk about that in a
moment. But, first, another question :
Do you understand that I neither suggest,
nor request, nor direct you to take
this journey ? ”
“ I do.”
“ And will you say so, if it should
seem to me to be necessary ? ”
“ I will, whether you should ask it or
not.”
“ And if those people should hold on
to you, — should give you free lodgings
till our election is over, or in any other
manner treat you unlike gentlemen,—
do you understand that I shall be absolutely
powerless to help you? ”
“ I understand that, sir, fully.”
“ And you are willing to go entirely
upon your own muscle ? ”
“ No, sir, not upon my muscle. I
suspect it will be more a matter of nerve
than of muscle.”
“ Do you hear that, Mr. Chase ? ”
said Mr. Lincoln, with an indescribable
look of comic gravity. “ He criticises
my English at the very moment that I
am giving him an office. Well, now
that we have arranged the preliminaries,
Mr. Chase, what terms shall we offer
the Rebels ? Draw your chair up to the
table, Mr. Gilmore, and take down what
Mr. Chase says.”
“ You had better name them, Mr.
Lincoln,” answered Mr. Chase. “I will
make any suggestions that may seem
necessary.”
“ Well, either way,” replied Mr. Lincoln.
He then went on to dictate to me,
without interruption from Mr. Chase,
the following: —
“ First. The immediate dissolution of
the Southern government, and disbandment
of its armies ; and the acknowledgment
by all the States in rebellion of the
supremacy of the Union.
“ Second. The total and absolute abolition
of slavery in every one of the late
slave States and throughout the Union.
This to be perpetual.
“ Third. Full amnesty to all who have
been in any way engaged in the Rebellion,
and their restoration to all the
rights of citizenship.
“ Fourth. All acts of secession to be
regarded as nullities ; and the late rebellious
States to be, and be regarded,
as if they had never attempted to secede
from the Union. Representation in the
House from the recent slave States to be
on the basis of their voting population.”
Here Mr. Chase remarked, “ About
that I may want to say something, Mr.
Lincoln; but please to go on now, and
I will suggest some points afterwards.”
“ Very well,” said Mr. Lincoln.
“ Fifth. The sum of five hundred millions,
hi United States stock, to be issued
and divided between the late slave States,
to be used by them in jiayment to slaveowners,
loyal and disloyal, for the slaves
emancipated by my proclamation. This
sum to be divided among the late slaveowners,
equally and equitably, at the
rate of one half the value of the slaves
in the year 1860 ; and if any surplus
should remain, it to be returned to the
United States treasury.
“ Sixth. A national convention to be
convened as soon as practicable, to ratify
this settlement, and make such
changes in the Constitution as may be in
accord with the new order of things.
“ Seventh. The intent and meaning of
all the foregoing is that the Union shall
be fully restored, as it was before the
Rebellion, with the exception that all
slaves within its borders are, and shall
forever be, freemen.”
As he finished the dictation, Mr. Lincoln
turned to Mr. Chase, saying, “ All
446 A Suppressed Chapter of History.
of which, Mr. Chase, is respectfully submitted
; and now I am open to amendments.”
A two hours’ discussion followed upon
the fourth and fifth clauses. The fourth
clause Mr. Chase desired should be modified,
so as to provide expressly for negro
suffrage. Mr. Lincoln replied that it
did, in effect, secure it, because it based
representation upon the voting population.
I t would be imadvisable to embarrass
a negotiation like this with such
a question.
To the fifth clause Mr. Chase objected
altogether, contending that it would be
regarded as “ buying a peace,” and in
its present mood the North would not
submit to such a measure. Mr. Lincoln
must bear in mind that no peace could
be lasting that was not based upon principles
of eternal justice ; and by those
principles the black was entitled to both
freedom and suffrage, without payment
or thanks to any one. To this Mr. Lincoln
replied that the sum named was
less than would be the cost of another
year of war, to say nothing of the bloodshed
; and it was also right to pay for
property we had destroyed, — repeating
much the same arguments he had
used to me fully a year previously. The
clause was finally modified by restricting
payment to owners of fifty slaves and
under, and reducing the amount named
to an absolute sum of four hundred millions.
To this Mr. Chase finally assented,
with the remark, “ I conceive that it
makes but very little difference. Mr.
Davis is not likely to accept the offer.
Mr. Gilmore is confident that he will not
accept of peace without sejiaration. To
get his declaration to that effect is why
you send Mr. Gilmore.”
“ True,” said Mr. Lincoln, “ but peace
may possibly come out of this; and I
don’t want to say a word that is not in
good faith. We want to draw Davis’s
fire ; but we must do it fairly. What I
think of most is the risk Mr. Gilmore
will run. The case is not the same with
[April,
him as with Jaquess. There is something
about that man, a kind of 1 thus
saith the Lord,’ that would protect him
anywhere. But Gilmore is not Jaquess.
He will go in with my pass, and the Rebels
won’t talk with him five minutes
before they ascertain that he is fully
possessed of my views. He will say
he does n’t represent me; but they will
think they know better. Now, as the
thing they want most is our recognition
of them, may they not hold on to him,
to foi'ce me to some step for his protection
that shall recognize them ? And if
they decline the overtures, as they probably
will, is it not likely they will refuse to
let him out before our election, because
of the damage he may do their friends
by publishing the facts to the country ?
Now, Mr. Chase, can you see any way
by which I can protect him ? ”
“ I cannot,” replied Mr. Chase, “ unless
you should copy the proposals into a
letter addressed to Mr. Gilmore, sign it,
and in it request him to read it to Mr.
Davis. That would give him a semiofficial
character, and they would not
dare to molest him.”
“ That I can’t do,” said Mr. Lincoln.
“ I t would be making direct overtures.
I don’t see, Gilmore, but you will have
to trust in the Lord; only be sure to
keep your powder dry, for they are wily
and unscrupulous fellows.”
I then informed him that Colonel Jaquess
had agreed to go with me. To
this he assented, and, turning to his table,
he wrote a couple of passes. They were
on small cards, one of which said sim-
Pty.—
Will General Grant allow J. R. Gilmore
and friend to pass our lines, with
ordinary baggage, and go South.
A. Lincoln.
July 6, 1S64.
This I delivered to General Grant;
the other I was able to retain. I t read
as follows : —
4887.] A Suppressed Chapter of History. 447
Allow J . R. Gilmore and friend to
pass, with ordinary baggage, to General
Grant, at his headquarters.A. Lincoln.
July 6, 1864.
As I glanced at the cards he remarked,
“ Tell Colonel Jaquess that I omit his
name on accomit of the talk about his
previous trip ; , and I wish you would explain
to him my refusal to see him. I
want him to feel kindly to me.”
As Mr. Chase and I rose to go, he
rose also, and, bidding “ Good-night ” to
Mr. Chase, he took me by the hand, and
held it while he said, “ God bless and
prosper you. My best wishes will be
with you. Good-by.”
It was after midnight when I recounted
the interview to Colonel Jaquess, and
told him that we would take the City
Point boat on the following afternoon.
In about a fortnight we arrived in
Richmond, and were admitted to an interview
with Mr. Davis and the Confederate
Secretary of State, Mr. Judah P.
Benjamin. What passed on that occasion
I soon afterwards recounted in an article
in this magazine, 1 and it need not be here
repeated. The sum of it all was that
the Confederate government would negotiate
upon no other basis than Southern
independence. Mr. Davis said, “ We
are not fighting for slavery. We are
fighting for independence, and that, or
extermination, we will have.” Again,
when we rose to take our leave of 'him,
he added, “ Say to Mr. Lincoln from
me that I shall at any time be pleased
to receive proposals on the basis of our
independence. I t will be useless to approach
me with any other.” This was
my report of Mr. Davis’s language, but
in a manifesto which Secretary Benjamin
addressed to the “ Minister to the
Continent,” he put this declaration of Mr.
Davis in even stronger terms. He represented
him as saying to us “ that the
separation of the States was an accom-
1 Atlaatic Monthly for September, 1864.
plished fa c t; that he had no authority
to receive proposals for negotiation except
by virtue of his office as President
of an independent Confederacy, and on
this basis alone must proposals be made
to him.”
These declarations were sufficiently
explicit to convince the most hopeful of
peace advocates that negotiations with
Mr. Davis could be conducted only with
the bayonet. It only remained to scatter
his words far and wide over the North,
to enable every voter to cast an intelligent
ballot at the approaching election,
which was to decide the fate of the
Union.
At General Grant’s invitation, Colonel
Jaquess remained a few days at City
Point, but I took the first boat for
Washington. On the way down the river,
and while the facts were fresh in my
mind, I wrote out the interview with
Davis and Benjamin, which I proposed
to read to Mr. Lincoln, to avoid the
omissions and inaccuracies that might
occur in a verbal recital. Arrived in
Washington, I hurried to the White
House. Mr. Sumner was closeted with
the President, but my name was no sooner
announced than a kindly voice said,
“ Come in. Bring him in.” As I entered
his room he rose, and, grasping
my hand, said, “ I ’m glad you ’re back.
I heard of your return two nights ago;
but they said you were non-committal.
What is it, — as we expected ? ”
“ Exactly, sir,” I answered. “ There
is no peace without separation. Comingdown
on the boat, I wrote out the interview,
to read to you when you are at
leisure.”
“ I am at leisure now,” he replied.
“ Sumner, too, would be glad to hear it.”
When I had finished the reading, he
said, “ What do you propose to do with
this ? ”
“ Put a beginning and an end to it,
sir, on my way home, and hand it to the
Tribune.”
“ Can’t you get it into The Atlantic ? ”
448 Song.
he asked. “ I t would have less of a partisan
look'there.”
“ No doubt I can, sir,” I replied;
“ hut there will he some delay about
it.”
“ And it is important that Davis’s
position should be known at once,” said
Mr. Lincoln. “ It will show the country
that I did n’t fight shy of Greeley’s
Niagara business without a reason ; and
everybody is agog to hear your report.
Let it go into the Tribune.”
“ Permit me to suggest,” said Mr.
Sumner, “ that Mr. Gilmore put at once
a short card, with the separation declaration
of Davis, into one of the Boston
papei’s, and then, as soon as,he can, the
fuller report into The Atlantic.”
“ That is it,” said Mr. Lincoln. “ Put
Davis’s ‘ We are not fighting for slavery,
we are fighting for independence,’
into the card, — that is enough; and
send me the proof of what goes into The
Atlantic. Don’t let it appear till I return
the proof. Some day all this will
come out, hut just now we must use discretion.”
As I rose to leave, Mr. Lincoln took
my hand, and while he held it in his
said, “ Jaquess was right, — God’s hand
is in it. This may he worth as much
to us as half a dozen battles. Get the
thing out as soon as you can ; hut don’t
forget to send me the proof of what you
write for The Atlantic. Good-hy. God
bless you.”
The “ card ” appeared in the Boston
[April,
Evening Transcript of July 22, 1864,
and two or three days afterwards Mr.
James T. Fields handed to me the proof
of The Atlantic article, which I at once
forwarded to Mr. Lincoln. He retained
it seven days, and thereby delayed the
issue of the magazine considerably beyond
the usual period ; and when the
proof came back it was curtailed a full
page and a half of its original proportions.
He had stricken out the terms
he was willing to grant to the Rebellion,
and all reference which I had made to
compensation for the slaves. I had intended
the article not only as a declaration
of Mr. Davis’s position, but also
as a manifesto to the Southern people
of the liberal conditions on which they
could return to the Union. I thought
a knowledge of those conditions would
create a rebellion within a rebellion, and
so much deplete the Southern armies as
to shorten the war materially.
Mr. Lincoln told me subsequently that
he held the proof under consideration
for a few days because he was at first
tempted to let the article stand as I had
written i t ; but that fuller reflection convinced
him that the publication of his
terms would sow dissension in the South,
and he was unwilling that his words
should have any such effect. Had these
terms been accepted, the South would
have come out of the war in a better
financial position than the North, and
the revolted States would have been
saved the long agony of reconstruction.
Edmund Kirlce.