GABRIEL'S   DEFEAT 

T~N  exploring  among  dusty  files  of  newspapers 
for  the  true  records  of  Denmark  Vesey 
and  Nat  Turner,  I  have  caught  occasional 
glimpses  of  a  plot  perhaps  more  wide  in  its 
outlines  than  that  of  either,  which  has  lain 
obscure  in  the  darkness  of  half  a  century, 
traceable  only  in  the  political  events  which 
dated  from  it,  and  the  utter  incorrectness  of 
the  scanty  traditions  which  assumed  to  pre 
serve  it.  And  though  researches  in  public 
libraries  have  only  proved  to  me  how  rapidly 
the  materials  for  American  history  are  vanish 
ing, —  since  not  one  of  our  great  institutions 
possessed,  a  few  years  since,  a  file  of  any 
Southern  newspaper  of  the  year  1800,  —  yet 
the  little  which  I  have  gained  may  have  an 
interest  that  makes  it  worth  preserving. 
Three  times,  at  intervals  of  thirty  years, 

185 


186  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

did  a  wave  of  unutterable  terror  sweep  across 
the  Old  Dominion,  bringing  thoughts  of  agony 
to  every  Virginian  master,  and  of  vague  hope 
to  every  Virginian  slave.  Each  time  did  one 
man's  name  become  a  spell  of  dismay  and  a 
symbol  of  deliverance.  Each  time  did  that 
name  eclipse  its  predecessor,  while  recalling 
it  for  a  moment  to  fresher  memory:  John 
Brown  revived  the  story  of  Nat  Turner,  as 
in  his  day  Nat  Turner  recalled  the  vaster 
schemes  of  Gabriel. 

On  Sept.  8,  1800,  a  Virginia  correspondent 
wrote  thus  to  the  Philadelphia  United  -  States 
Gazette :  — 

"  For  the  week  past,  we  have  been  under 
momentary  expectation  of  a  rising  among  the 
negroes,  who  have  assembled  to  the  number  of 
nine  hundred  or  a  thousand,  and  threatened  to 
massacre  all  the  whites.  They  are  armed  with 
desperate  weapons,  and  secrete  themselves  in 
the  woods.  God  only  knows  our  fate :  we 
have  strong  guards  every  night  under  arms." 

It  was  no  wonder,  if  there  were  foundation 
for  such  rumors.  Liberty  was  the  creed  or  the 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  187 

cant  of  the  day.  France  was  being  disturbed 
by  revolution,  and  England  by  Clarkson.  In 
America,  slavery  was  habitually  recognized  as 
a  misfortune  and  an  error,  only  to  be  palliated 
by  the  nearness  of  its  expected  end.  How 
freely  anti-slavery  pamphlets  had  been  circu 
lated  in  Virginia,  we  know  from  the  priceless 
volumes  collected  and  annotated  by  Wash 
ington,  and  now  preserved  in  the  Boston 
Athenseum.  Jefferson's  "  Notes  on  Virginia," 
itself  an  anti-slavery  tract,  had  passed  through 
seven  editions.  Judge  St.  George  Tucker, 
law-professor  in  William  and  Mary  College, 
had  recently  published  his  noble  work,  "  A 
Dissertation  on  Slavery,  with  a  Proposal  for 
the  Gradual  Abolition  of  it  in  the  State  of 
Virginia."  From  all  this  agitation,  a  slave 
insurrection  was  a  mere  corollary.  With  so 
much  electricity  in  the  air,  a  single  flash  of 
lightning  foreboded  all  the  terrors  of  the  tem 
pest.  Let  but  a  single  armed  negro  be  seen  or 
suspected,  and  at  once,  on  many  a  lonely  plan 
tation,  there  were  trembling  hands  at  work  to 
bar  doors  and  windows  that  seldom  had  been 


188  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

even  closed  before,  and  there  was  shuddering 
when  a  gray  squirrel  scrambled  over  the  roof, 
or  a  shower  of  walnuts  came  down  clattering 
from  the  overhanging  boughs. 

Early  in  September,  1800,  as  a  certain  Mr. 
Moseley  Sheppard,  of  Henrico  County  in  Vir 
ginia,  was  one  day  sitting  in  his  counting-room, 
two  negroes  knocked  at  the  door,  and  were  let 
in.  They  shut  the  door  themselves,  and  began 
to  unfold  an  insurrectionary  plot,  which  was 
subsequently  repeated  by  one  of  them,  named 
Ben  Woodfolk  or  Woolfolk,  in  presence  of  the 
court,  on  the  15th  of  the  same  month. 

He  stated,  that  about  the  first  of  the  preced 
ing  June,  he  had  been  asked  by  a  negro  named 
Colonel  George  whether  he  would  like  to  be 
made  a  Mason.  He  refused ;  but  George  ulti 
mately  prevailed  on  him  to  have  an  interview 
with  a  certain  leading  man  among  the  blacks, 
named  Gabriel.  Arrived  at  the  place  of  meet 
ing,  he  found  many  persons  assembled,  to  whom 
a  preliminary  oath  was  administered,  that  they 
would  keep  secret  all  which  they  might  hear. 
The  leaders  then  began,  to  the  dismay  of  this 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  189 

witness,  to  allude  to  a  plan  of  insurrection, 
which,  as  they  stated,  was  already  far  advanced 
toward  maturity.  Presently  a  man  named 
Martin,  Gabriel's  brother,  proposed  religious 
services,  caused  the  company  to  be  duly  seated, 
and  began  an  impassioned  exposition  of  Scrip 
ture,  bearing  upon  the  perilous  theme.  The 
Israelites  were  glowingly  portrayed  as  a  type 
of  successful  resistance  to  tyranny ;  and  it  was 
argued,  that  now,  as  then,  God  would  stretch 
forth  his  arm  to  save,  and  would  strengthen  a 
hundred  to  overthrow  a  thousand.  Thus  passed, 
the  witness  stated,  this  preparatory  meeting. 
At  a  subsequent  gathering  the  affair  was 
brought  to  a  point ;  and  the  only  difficult  ques 
tion  was,  whether  to  rise  in  rebellion  upon  a 
certain  Saturday,  or  upon  the  Sunday  following. 
Gabriel  said  that  Saturday  was  the  day  already 
fixed,  and  that  it  must  not  be  altered;  but 
George  was  for  changing  it  to  Sunday,  as  being 
more  convenient  for  the  country  negroes,  who 
could  travel  on  that  day  without  suspicion. 
Gabriel,  however,  said  decisively  that  they  had 
enough  to  carry  Richmond  without  them ;  and 


190  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

Saturday  was  therefore  retained  as  the  moment 
ous  day. 

This  was  the  confession,  so  far  as  it  is  now 
accessible ;  and  on  the  strength  of  it,  Ben 
Woolfolk  was  promptly  pardoned  by  the  court 
for  all  his  sins,  past,  present,  or  to  come, 
and  they  proceeded  with  their  investigation. 
Of  Gabriel  little  appeared  to  be  known,  ex 
cept  that  he  had  been  the  property  of  Thomas 
Prosser,  a  young  man  who  had  recently  in 
herited  a  plantation  a  few  miles  from  Rich 
mond,  and  who  had  the  reputation  among  his 
neighbors  of  "  behaving  with  great  barbarity  to 
his  slaves."  Gabriel  was,  however,  reported 
to  be  "a  fellow  of  courage  and  intellect  above 
his  rank  in  life,"  to  be  about  twenty-five  years 
of  age,  and  to  be  guiltless  of  the  alphabet. 

Further  inquiry  made  it  appear  that  the 
preparations  of  the  insurgents  were  hardly  ade 
quate  to  any  grand  revolutionary  design,  —  at 
least,  if  they  proposed  to  begin  with  open  war 
fare.  The  commissariat  may  have  been  well 
organized,  for  black  Virginians  are  apt  to  have 
a  prudent  eye  to  the  larder ;  but  the  ordnance 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  191 

department  and  the  treasury  were  as  low  as  if 
Secretary  Floyd  had  been  in  charge  of  them.  A 
slave  called  "Prosser's  Ben"  testified  that  he 
went  with  Gabriel  to  see  Ben  Woolfolk,  who*" 
was  going  to  Caroline  County  to  enlist  men, 
and  that  "  Gabriel  gave  him  three  shillings  for 
himself  and  three  other  negroes,  to  be  ex 
pended  in  recruiting  men."  Their  arms  and 
ammunition,  so  far  as  reported,  consisted  of 
a  peck  of  bullets,  ten  pounds  of  powder,  and 
twelve  scythe-swords,  made  by  Gabriel's 
brother  Solomon,  and  fitted  with  handles  by 
Gabriel  himself.  "These  cutlasses,"  said  sub 
sequently  a  white  eye-witness,  "are  made  of 
scythes  cut  in  two  and  fixed  into  well-turned 
handles.  I  have  never  seen  arms  so  murder 
ous.  Those  who  still  doubt  the  importance 
of  the  conspiracy  which  has  been  so  for 
tunately  frustrated  would  shudder  with  hor 
ror  at  the  sight  of  these  instruments  of 
death."  And  as  it  presently  appeared  that 
a  conspirator  named  Scott  had  astonished  his 
master  by  accidentally  pulling  ten  dollars 
from  a  ragged  pocket  which  seemed  made- 


192  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

quate  to  the  custody  of  ten  cents,  it  was 
agreed  that  the  plot  might  still  be  danger 
ous,  even  though  the  resources  seemed  limited. 
And  indeed,  as  was  soon  discovered,  the  effec 
tive  weapon  of  the  insurgents  lay  in  the  very 
audacity  of  their  plan.  If  the  current  state 
ments  of  all  the  Virginia  letter-writers  were 
true,  "  nothing  could  have  been  better  con 
trived."  It  was  to  have  taken  effect  on  the  first 
day  of  September.  The  rendezvous  for  the 
blacks  was  to  be  a  brook  six  miles  from  Rich 
mond.  Eleven  hundred  men  were  to  assemble 
there,  and  were  to  be  divided  into  three  columns, 
their  officers  having  been  designated  in  advance. 
All  were  to  march  on  Richmond,  —  then  a  town 
of  eight  thousand  inhabitants,  —  under  cover  of 
night.  The  right  wing  was  instantly  to  seize 
upon  the  penitentiary  building,  just  converted 
into  an  arsenal ;  while  the  left  wing  was  to  take 
possession  of  the  powder-house.  These  two 
columns  were  to  be  armed  chiefly  with  clubs,  as 
their  undertaking  depended  for  success  upon 
surprise,  and  was  expected  to  prevail  without 
hard  fighting.  But  it  was  the  central  force, 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  193 

armed  with  muskets,  cutlasses,  knives,  and 
pikes,  upon  which  the  chief  responsibility 
rested ;  these  men  were  to  enter  the  town  at 
both  ends  simultaneously,  and  begin  a  general 
carnage,  none  being  excepted  save  the  French 
inhabitants,  who  were  supposed  for  some  reason 
to  be  friendly  to  the  negroes.  In  a  very  few 
hours,  it  was  thought,  they  would  have  entire 
control  of  the  metropolis.  And  that  this  hope 
was  not  in  the  least  unreasonable,  was  shown 
by  the  subsequent  confessions  of  weakness  from 
the  whites.  "  They  could  scarcely  have  failed 
of  success,"  wrote  the  Richmond  correspond 
ent  of  the  Boston  Chronicle;  "for,  after  all, 
we  could  only  muster  four  or  five  hundred 
men,  of  whom  not  more  than  thirty  had 
muskets." 

For  the  insurgents,  if  successful,  the  peniten 
tiary  held  several  thousand  stand  of  arms ;  the 
powder-house  was  well  stocked;  the  Capitol 
contained  the  State  treasury  ;  the  mills  would 
give  them  bread ;  the  control  of  the  bridge 
across  James  River  would  keep  off  enemies 
from  beyond.  Thus  secured  and  provided, 


194  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

they  planned  to  issue  proclamations  summon 
ing  to  their  standard  "  their  fellow-negroes 
and  the  friends  of  humanity  throughout  the 
continent."  In  a  week,  it  was  estimated,  they 
would  have  fifty  thousand  men  on  their  side, 
with  which  force  they  could  easily  possess 
themselves  of  other  towns ;  and,  indeed,  a 
slave  named  John  Scott  —  possibly  the  danger 
ous  possessor  of  the  ten  dollars  —  was  already 
appointed  to  head  the  attack  on  Petersburg. 
But  in  case  of  final  failure,  the  project  included 
a  retreat  to  the  mountains,  with  their  new 
found  property.  John  Brown  was  therefore 
anticipated  by  Gabriel,  sixty  years  before,  in 
believing  the  Virginia  mountains  to  have  been 
"created,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  as 
a  place  of  refuge  for  fugitive  slaves." 

These  are  the  statements  of  the  contempo 
rary  witnesses ;  they  are  repeated  in  many 
newspapers  of  the  year  1800,  and  are  in  them 
selves  clear  and  consistent.  Whether  they  are 
on  the  whole  exaggerated  or  under-stated,  it  is 
now  impossible  to  say.  It  is  certain  that  a 
Richmond  paper  of  Sept.  12  (quoted  in  the 


GABRIEL'S   DEFEAT  195 

New -York  G-azette  of  Sept.  18)  declares  that 
"  the  plot  has  been  entirely  exploded,  which 
was  shallow ;  and,  had  the  attempt  been  made 
to  carry  it  into  execution,  but  little  resist 
ance  would  have  been  required  to  render  the 
scheme  entirely  abortive."  But  it  is  neces 
sary  to  remember  that  this  is  no  more  than 
the  Charleston  newspapers  said  at  the  very 
crisis  of  Denmark  Vesey's  formidable  plot. 
"  Last  evening,"  wrote  a  lady  from  Charleston 
in  1822,  "  twenty -five  hundred  of  our  citizens 
were  under  arms  to  guard  our  property  and 
lives.  But  it  is  a  subject  not  to  be  mentioned 
[so  underscored] ;  and  unless  you  hear  of  it 
elsewhere,  say  nothing  about  it."  Thus  it  is 
always  hard  to  know  whether  to  assume  the 
facts  of  an  insurrection  as  above  or  below 
the  estimates.  This  Virginian  excitement  also 
happened  at  a  period  of  intense  political  agita 
tion,  and  was  seized  upon  as  a  boon  by  the 
Federalists.  The  very  article  above  quoted  is 
ironically  headed  "Holy  Insurrection,"  and 
takes  its  motto  from  Jefferson,  with  profuse 
capital  letters :  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Master  is 


196       TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

abating,  that  of  the  Slave  rising  from  the  dust, 
his  condition  mollifying." 

In  view  of  the  political  aspect  thus  given 
to  the  plot,  and  of  its  ingenuity  and  thorough 
ness  likewise,  the  Virginians  were  naturally 
disposed  to  attribute  to  white  men  some  share 
in  it;  and  speculation  presently  began  to  run 
wild.  The  newspapers  were  soon  full  of  theo 
ries,  no  two  being  alike,  and  no  one  credible. 
The  plot  originated,  some  said,  in  certain  hand 
bills  written  by  Jefferson's  friend  Callender, 
then  in  prison  at  Richmond  on  a  charge  of 
sedition ;  these  were  circulated  by  two  French 
negroes,  aided  by  a  "  United  Irishman  "  calling 
himself  a  Methodist  preacher,  and  it  was  in 
consideration  of  these  services  that  no  French 
man  was  to  be  injured  by  the  slaves.  When 
Gabriel  was  arrested,  the  editor  of  the  United- 
States  Gazette  affected  much  diplomatic  sur 
prise  that  no  letters  were  yet  found  upon  his 
person  "  from  Fries,  Gallatin,  or  Duane,  nor 
was  he  at  the  time  of  his  capture  accompanied 
by  any  United  Irishman."  "He,  however, 
acknowledges  that  there  are  others  concerned, 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  197 

and  that  he  is  not  the  principal  instigator." 
All  Federalists  agreed  that  the  Southern 
Democratic  talk  was  constructive  insurrection, 
—  which  it  certainly  was,  —  and  they  painted 
graphic  pictures  of  noisy  "  Jacobins "  over 
their  wine,  and  eager  dusky  listeners  behind 
their  chairs.  "  It  is  evident  that  the  French 
principles  of  liberty  and  equality  have  been 
effused  into  the  minds  of  the  negroes,  and 
that  the  incautious  and  intemperate  use  of  the 
words  by  some  whites  among  us  have  inspired 
them  with  hopes  of  success."  "  While  the  fiery 
Hotspurs  of  the  State  vociferate  their  French 
babble  of  the  natural  equality  of  man,  the 
insulted  negro  will  be  constantly  stimulated 
to  cast  away  his  cords,  and  to  sharpen  his 
pike."  "  It  is,  moreover,  believed,  though  not 
positively  known,  that  a  great  many  of  our 
profligate  and  abandoned  whites  (who  are 
distinguished  by  the  burlesque  appellation  of 
Democrats)  are  implicated  with  the  blacks,  and 
would  have  joined  them  if  they  had  commenced 
their  operations.  .  .  .  The  Jacobin  printers  and 
their  friends  are  panic  -  struck.  Never  was 


198  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

terror  more  strongly  depicted  in  the  counte 
nances  of  men."  These  extracts  from  three 
different  Federalist  newspapers  show  the  ami 
able  emotions  of  that  side  of  the  house ;  while 
Democratic  Duane,  in  the  Aurora,  could  find 
no  better  repartee  than  to  attribute  the  whole 
trouble  to  the  policy  of  the  administration 
in  renewing  commercial  intercourse  with  San 
Domingo. 

I  have  discovered  in  the  Norfolk  Epitome 
of  the  Times,  for  Oct.  9,  1800,  a  remarkable 
epistle  written  from  Richmond  Jail  by  the 
unfortunate  Callender  himself.  He  indignantly 
denies  the  charges  against  the  Democrats,  of 
complicity  in  dangerous  plots,  boldly  retorting 
them  upon  the  Federalists.  "  An  insurrection 
at  this  critical  moment  by  the  negroes  of  the 
Southern  States  would  have  thrown  €very  thing 
into  confusion,  and  consequently  it  was  to  have 
prevented  the  choice  of  electors  in  the  whole  or 
the  greater  part  of  the  States  to  the  south 
of  the  Potomac.  Such  a  disaster  must  have 
tended  directly  to  injure  the  interests  of  Mr. 
Jefferson,  and  to  promote  the  slender  possibility 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  199 

of  a  second  election  of  Mr.  Adams."  And,  to 
be  sure,  the  United  -  States  Gazette  followed 
up  the  thing  with  a  good,  single-minded  party 
malice  which  cannot  be  surpassed  in  these 
present  days,  ending  in  such  altitudes  of  sub 
lime  coolness  as  the  following :  "  The  insur 
rection  of  the  negroes  in  the  Southern  States, 
which  appears  to  be  organized  on  the  true 
French  plan,  must  be  decisive,  with  every 
reflecting  man  in  those  States,  of  the  election  of 
Mr.  Adams  and  Gen.  Pinckney.  The  military 
skill  and  approved  bravery  of  the  general  must 
be  peculiarly  valuable  to  his  countrymen  at 
these  trying  moments."  Let  us  have  a  military 
Vice-President,  by  all  means,  to  meet  this 
formidable  exigency  of  Gabriel's  peck  of  bull 
ets,  and  this  unexplained  three  shillings  in  the 
pocket  of  "  Prosser's  Ben  "  ! 

But  Gabriel's  campaign  failed,  like  that  of 
the  Federalists  ;  and  the  appointed  day  brought 
disasters  more  fatal  than  even  the  sword  of 
Gen.  Pinckney.  The  affrighted  negroes  de 
clared  that  "the  stars  in  their  courses  fought 
against  Sisera."  The  most  furious  tempest  ever 


200  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

known  in  Virginia  burst  upon  the  land  that  day, 
instead  of  an  insurrection.  Roads  and  planta 
tions  were  submerged.  Bridges  were  carried 
away.  The  fords,  which  then,  as  now,  were 
the  frequent  substitutes  for  bridges  in  that 
region,  were  rendered  wholly  impassable.  The 
Brook  Swamp,  one  of  the  most  important  stra 
tegic  points  of  the  insurgents,  was  entirely 
inundated,  hopelessly  dividing  Prosser's  farm 
from  Richmond;  the  country  negroes  could  not 
get  in,  nor  those  from  the  city  get  out.  The 
thousand  men  dwindled  to  a  few  hundred,  and 
these  half  paralyzed  by  superstition ;  there  was 
nothing  to  do  but  to  dismiss  them,  and  before 
they  could  re-assemble  they  were  betrayed. 

That  the  greatest  alarm  was  instantly  created 
throughout  the  community,  there  is  no  ques 
tion.  All  the  city  of  Richmond  was  in  arms, 
and  in  all  large  towns  of  the  State  the  night- 
patrol  was  doubled.  It  is  a  little  amusing  to 
find  it  formally  announced,  that  "  the  Governor, 
impressed  with  the  magnitude  of  the  danger, 
has  appointed  for  himself  three  aides-de-camp." 
A  troop  of  United-States  cavalry  was  ordered 


GABRIEL'S   DEFEAT  201 

to  Richmond.  Numerous  arrests  were  made. 
Men  were  convicted  on  one  day,  and  hanged 
on  the  next,  —  five,  six,  ten,  fifteen  at  a  time, 
almost  without  evidence.  Three  hundred  dol 
lars  were  offered  by  Gov.  Monroe  for  the  arrest 
of  Gabriel ;  as  much  more  for  another  chief 
named  Jack  Bowler,  alias  Ditcher ;  whereupon 
Bowler  alias  Ditcher  surrendered  himself,  but 
it  took  some  weeks  to  get  upon  the  track  of 
Gabriel.  He  was  finally  captured  at  Norfolk, 
on  board  a  schooner  just  arrived  from  Rich 
mond,  in  whose  hold  he  had  concealed  himself 
for  eleven  days,  having  thrown  overboard  a 
bayonet  and  bludgeon,  which  were  his  only 
arms.  Crowds  of  people  collected  to  see  him, 
including  many  of  his  own  color.  He  was 
arrested  on  Sept.  24,  convicted  on  Oct.  3,  and 
executed  on  Oct.  7 ;  and  it  is  known  of  him 
further,  only,  that,  like  almost  all  leaders  of 
slave  insurrections,  he  showed  a  courage  which 
his  enemies  could  not  gainsay.  "  When  he  was 
apprehended,  he  manifested  the  greatest  marks 
of  firmness  and  confidence,  showing  not  the 
least  disposition  to  equivocate,  or  screen  himself 


202  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

from  justice,"  —  but  making  no  confession  that 
could  implicate  any  one  else.  "The  behavior 
of  Gabriel  under  his  misfortunes,"  said  the 
Norfolk  Epitome  of  Sept.  25,  "was  such  as 
might  be  expected  from  a  mind  capable  of 
forming  the  daring  project  which  he  had  con 
ceived."  The  United-States  Gazette  for  Oct.  9 
states,  more  sarcastically,  that  "  the  general  is 
said  to  have  manifested  the  utmost  composure, 
and  with  the  true  spirit  of  heroism  seems  ready 
to  resign  his  high  office,  and  even  his  life, 
rather  than  gratify  the  officious  inquiries  of 
the  Governor." 

Some  of  these  newspapers  suggest  that  the 
authorities  found  it  good  policy  to  omit  the 
statement  made  by  Gabriel,  whatever  it  was. 
At  any  rate,  he  assured  them  that  he  was  by  no 
means  the  sole  instigator  of  the  affair ;  he  could 
name  many,  even  in  Norfolk,  who  were  more 
deeply  concerned.  To  his  brother  Solomon  he 
is  said  to  have  stated  that  the  real  head  of  the 
plot  was  Jack  Bowler.  Still  another  leader  was 
"  Gen.  John  Scott,"  already  mentioned,  the 
slave  of  Mr.  Greenhow,  hired  by  Mr.  McCrea. 


GABRIEL'S   DEFEAT  203 

He  was  captured  by  his  employer  in  Norfolk, 
just  as  he  was  boldly  entering  a  public  convey 
ance  to  escape ;  and  the  Baltimore  Telegraphe 
declared  that  he  had  a  written  paper  directing 
him  to  apply  to  Alexander  Biddenhurst  or 
Weddenhurst  in  Philadelphia,  "corner  of  Coats 
Alley  and  Budd  Street,  who  would  supply 
his  needs."  What  became  of  this  military 
individual,  or  of  his  Philadelphia  sympathizers, 
does  not  appear.  But  it  was  noticed,  as 
usually  happens  in  such  cases,  that  all  the  in 
surgents  had  previously  passed  for  saints.  "  It 
consists  within  my  knowledge,"  says  one  letter- 
writer,  "  that  many  of  these  wretches  who  were  or 
would  have  been  partakers  in  the  plot  have  been 
treated  with  the  utmost  tenderness  by  their  mas 
ters,  and  were  more  like  children  than  slaves." 

These  appear  to  be  all  the  details  now  acces 
sible  of  this  once  famous  plot.  They  were  not 
very  freely  published,  even  at  the  time.  "  The 
minutiae  of  the  conspiracy  have  not  been 
detailed  to  the  public,"  said  the  Salem  (Mass.) 
Gazette  of  Oct.  7,  "  and  perhaps,  through  a 
mistaken  notion  of  prudence  and  policy,  will 


204  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

not  be  detailed  in  the  Richmond  papers."  The 
New  -  York  Commercial  Advertiser  of  Oct.  13 
was  still  more  explicit.  "  The  trials  of  the 
negroes  concerned  in  the  late  insurrection  are 
suspended  until  the  opinions  of  the  Legislature 
can  be  had  on  the  subject.  This  measure  is 
said  to  be  owing  to  the  immense  numbers  who 
are  interested  in  the  plot,  whose  death,  should 
they  all  be  found  guilty  and  be  executed,  will 
nearly  produce  the  annihilation  of  the  blacks 
in  this  part  of  the  country."  And  in  the  next 
issue  of  the  same  journal  a  Richmond  corre 
spondent  makes  a  similar  statement,  with  the 
following  addition  :  "  A  conditional  amnesty  is 
perhaps  expected.  At  the  next  session  of  the 
Legislature  [of  Virginia],  they  took  into  consid 
eration  the  subject  referred  to  them,  in  secret 
session,  with  closed  doors.  The  whole  result 
of  their  deliberations  has  never  yet  been  made 
piiblic,  as  the  injunction  of  secrecy  has  never 
been  removed.  To  satisfy  the  court,  the  public, 
and  themselves,  they  had  a  task  so  difficult  to 
perform,  that  it  is  not  surprising  that  their 
deliberations  were  in  secret." 


GABRIEL'S   DEFEAT  205 

It  is  a  matter  of  historical  interest  to  know 
that  in  these  mysterious  sessions  lay  the  germs 
of  the  American  Colonization  Society.  A 
correspondence  was  at  once  secretly  commenced 
between  the  Governor  of  Virginia  and  the 
President  of  the  United  States,  with  a  view  to 
securing  a  grant  of  land  whither  troublesome 
slaves  might  be  banished.  Nothing  came  of  it 
then;  but  in  1801,  1802,  and  1804,  these 
attempts  were  renewed.  And  finally,  on  Jan. 
22,  1805,  the  following  vote  was  passed,  still 
in  secret  session :  "  Resolved,  that  the  Senators 
of  this  State  in  the  Congress  of  the  United 
States  be  instructed,  and  the  Representatives 
be  requested,  to  use  their  best  efforts  for  the 
obtaining  from  the  General  Government  a 
competent  portion  of  territory  in  the  State  of 
Louisiana,  to  be  appropriated  to  the  residence 
of  such  people  of  color  as  have  been  or  shall  be 
emancipated,  or  hereafter  may  become  danger 
ous  to  the  public  safety,"  etc.  But  of  all  these 
efforts  nothing  was  known  till  their  record  was 
accidentally  discovered  by  Charles  Fenton 
Mercer  in  1816.  He  at  once  brought  the  mat- 


206  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

ter  to  light,  and  moved  a  similar  resolution  in 
the  Virginia  Legislature ;  it  was  almost  unani 
mously  adopted,  and  the  first  formal  meeting 
of  the  Colonization  Society,  in  1817,  was  called 
uin  aid  "  of  this  Virginia  movement.  But  the 
whole  correspondence  was  never  made  public 
until  the  Nat  Turner  insurrection  of  1831 
recalled  the  previous  excitement ;  and  these 
papers  were  demanded  by  Mr.  Summers,  a 
member  of  the  Legislature,  who  described  them 
as  "  having  originated  in  a  convulsion  similar  to 
that  which  had  recently,  but  more  terribly, 
occurred." 

But  neither  these  subsequent  papers,  nor  any 
documents  which  now  appear  accessible,  can 
supply  any  authentic  or  trustworthy  evidence 
as  to  the  real  extent  of  the  earlier  plot.  It 
certainly  was  not  confined  to  the  mere  envi 
rons  of  Richmond.  The  Norfolk  Epitome  of 
Oct.  6  states  that  on  the  6th  and  7th  of  the 
previous  month  one  hundred  and  fifty  blacks, 
including  twenty  from  Norfolk,  were  assem 
bled  near  Whitlock's  Mills  in  Suffolk  County, 
and  remained  in  the  neighborhood  till  the 


GABRIEL'S   DEFEAT  207 

failure  of  the  Richmond  plan  became  known. 
Petersburg  newspapers  also  had  letters  con 
taining  similar  tales.  Then  the  alarm  spread 
more  widely.  Near  Edenton,  N.C.,  there 
was  undoubtedly  a  real  insurrection,  though 
promptly  suppressed;  and  many  families  ulti 
mately  removed  from  that  vicinity  in  conse 
quence.  In  Charleston,  S.C.,  there  was  still 
greater  excitement,  if  the  contemporary  press 
may  be  trusted ,  it  was  reported  that  the  free 
holders  had  been  summoned  to  appear  in  arms, 
on  penalty  of  a  fine  of  fifteen  pounds,  which 
many  preferred  to  pay  rather  than  risk  taking 
the  fever  which  then  prevailed.  These  reports 
were,  however,  zealously  contradicted  in  letters 
from  Charleston,  dated  Oct.  8;  and  the  Charles 
ton  newspapers  up  to  Sept.  17  had  certainly 
contained  no  reference  to  any  especial  excite 
ment.  This  alone  might  not  settle  the  fact,  for 
reasons  already  given.  But  the  omission  of  any 
such  affair  from  the  valuable  pamphlet  pub 
lished  in  1822  by  Edwin  C.  Holland,  contain 
ing  reminiscences  of  insurrections  in  South 
Carolina,  is  presumptive  evidence  that  no  very 
extended  agitation  occurred. 


208  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

But  wherever  there  was  a  black  population, 
slave  or  emancipated,  men's  startled  consciences 
made  cowards  of  them  all,  and  recognized  the 
negro  as  a  dangerous  man,  because  an  injured 
one.  In  Philadelphia  it  was  seriously  proposed 
to  prohibit  the  use  of  sky-rockets  for  a  time, 
because  they  had  been  employed  as  signals  in 
San  Domingo.  "Even  in  Boston,"  said  the 
New- York  Daily  Advertiser  of  Sept.  20,  "fears 
are  expressed,  and  measures  of  prevention 
adopted."  This  probably  refers  to  a  singular 
advertisement  which  appeared  in  some  of  the 
Boston  newspapers  on  Sept.  16,  and  runs  as 

follows :  — 

"NOTICE  TO  BLACKS. 

"  The  officers  of  the  police  having  made  returns  to  the 
subscriber  of  the  names  of  the  following  persons  who 
are  Africans  or  negroes,  not  subjects  of  the  Emperor 
of  Morocco  nor  citizens  of  any  of  the  United  States,  the 
same  are  hereby  warned  and  directed  to  depart  out  of 
this  Commonwealth  before  the  tenth  day  of  October 
next,  as  they  would  avoid  the  pains  and  penalties  of 
the  law  in  that  case  provided,  which  was  passed  by  the 
Legislature  March  26,  1788. 

"CHARLES  BULFINCH,  Superintendent. 

"By  order  and  direction  of  the  Selectmen." 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  209 

The  names  annexed  are  about  three  hundred, 
with  the  places  of  their  supposed  origin,  and 
they  occupy  a  column  of  the  paper.  So  at 
least  asserts  the  United-States  Gazette  of  Sept. 
23.  "It  seems  probable,"  adds  the  editor, 
"from  the  nature  of  the  notice,  that  some  sus 
picion  of  the  design  of  the  negroes  is  enter 
tained  ;  and  we  regret  to  say  there  is  too  much 
cause."  The  law  of  1788  above  mentioned 
was  "An  Act  for  suppressing  rogues,  vaga 
bonds,  and  the  like,"  which  forbade  all  persons 
of  African  descent,  unless  citizens  of  some  one  of 
the  United  States  or  subjects  of  the  Emperor 
of  Morocco,  from  remaining  more  than  two 
months  within  the  Commonwealth,  on  penalty 
of  imprisonment  and  hard  labor.  This  singular 
statute  remained  unrepealed  until  1834. 

Amid  the  general  harmony  in  the  contem 
porary  narratives  of  Gabriel's  insurrection,  it 
would  be  improper  to  pass  by  one  exceptional 
legend,  which  by  some  singular  fatality  has 
obtained  more  circulation  than  all  the  true 
accounts  put  together.  I  can  trace  it  no  farther 
back  than  Nat  Turner's  time,  when  it  was  pub- 


210  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

lished  in  the  Albany  Evening  Journal;  thence 
transferred  to  the  Liberator  of  Sept.  17,  1831, 
and  many  other  newspapers ;  then  refuted  in 
detail  by  the  Richmond  Enquirer  of  Oct.  21 ; 
then  resuscitated  in  the  John-Brown  epoch 
by  the  Philadelphia  Press,  and  extensively 
copied.  It  is  fresh,  spirited,  and  full  of  graphic 
and  interesting  details,  nearly  every  one  of 
which  is  altogether  false. 

Gabriel  in  this  narrative  becomes  a  rather 
mythical  being,  of  vast  abilities  and  life-long 
preparations.  He  bought  his  freedom,  it  is 
stated,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  then 
travelled  all  over  the  Southern  States,  enlisting 
confederates  and  forming  stores  of  arms.  At 
length  his  plot  was  discovered,  in  consequence 
of  three  negroes  having  been  seen  riding  out 
of  a  stable-yard  together;  and  the  Governor 
offered  a  reward  of  ten  thousand  dollars  for 
further  information,  to  which  a  Richmond  gen 
tleman  added  as  much  more.  Gabriel  con 
cealed  himself  on  board  the  "  Sally  Ann,"  a 
vessel  just  sailing  for  San  Domingo,  and  was 
revealed  by  his  little  nephew,  whom  he  had 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  211 

sent  for  a  jug  of  rum.  Finally,  the  narrative 
puts  an  eloquent  dying  speech  into  Gabriel's 
mouth,  and,  to  give  a  properly  tragic  consum 
mation,  causes  him  to  be  torn  to  death  by  four 
wild  horses.  The  last  item  is,  however,  omitted 
in  the  more  recent  reprints  of  the  story. 

Every  one  of  these  statements  appears  to 
be  absolutely  erroneous.  Gabriel  lived  and 
died  a  slave,  and  was  probably  never  out  of 
Virginia.  His  plot  was  voluntarily  revealed 
by  accomplices.  The  rewards  offered  for  his 
arrest  amounted  to  three  hundred  dollars  only. 
He  concealed  himself  on  board  the  schooner 
"  Mary,"  bound  to  Norfolk,  and  was  discovered 
by  the  police.  He  died  on  the  gallows,  with 
ten  associates,  having  made  no  address  to  the 
court  or  the  people.  All  the  errors  of  the 
statement  were  contradicted  when  it  was  first 
made  public,  but  they  have  proved  very  hard 
to  kill. 

Some  of  these  events  were  embodied  in  a 
song  bearing  the  same  title  with  this  essay, 
"  Gabriel's  Defeat,"  and  set  to  a  tune  of  the 
same  name,  both  being  composed  by  a  colored 


212  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

man.  Several  witnesses  have  assured  me  of 
having  heard  this  sung  in  Virginia,  as  a  favorite 
air  at  the  dances  of  the  white  people,  as  well 
as  in  the  huts  of  the  slaves.  It  is  surely  one 
of  history's  strange  parallelisms,  that  this  fatal 
enterprise,  like  that  of  John  Brown  afterwards, 
should  thus  have  embalmed  itself  in  music. 
And  twenty-two  years  after  these  events,  their 
impression  still  remained  vivid  enough  for 
Benjamin  Lundy,  in  Tennessee,  to  write :  "So 
well  had  they  matured  their  plot,  and  so  com 
pletely  had  they  organized  their  system  of 
operations,  that  nothing  but  a  seemingly  mirac 
ulous  intervention  of  the  arm  of  Providence 
was  supposed  to  have  been  capable  of  saving 
the  city  from  pillage  and  flames,  and  the  inhab 
itants  thereof  from  butchery.  So  dreadful  was 
the  alarm  and  so  great  the  consternation  pro 
duced  on  this  occasion,  that  a  member  of  Con 
gress  from  that  State  was  some  time  after  heard 
to  express  himself  in  his  place  as  follows: 
'  The  night-bell  is  never  heard  to  toll  in  the 
city  of  Richmond,  but  the  anxious  mother 


GABRIEL'S  DEFEAT  213 

presses  her  infant  more  closely  to  her  bosom.' ' 
The  Congressman  was  John  Randolph  of  Roa- 
noke,  and  it  was  Gabriel  who  had  taught  him 
the  lesson. 

And  longer  than  the  melancholy  life  of  that 
wayward  statesman,  —  down  even  to  the  begin 
ning  of  the  American  civil  war,  —  there  lin 
gered  in  Richmond  a  memorial  of  those  days, 
most  peculiar  and  most  instructive.  Before  the 
days  of  secession,  when  the  Northern  traveller  in 
Virginia,  after  traversing  for  weary  leagues  its 
miry  ways,  its  desolate  fields,  and  its  flowery 
forests,  rode  at  last  into  its  metropolis,  he  was 
sure  to  be  guided  ere  long  to  visit  its  stately 
Capitol,  modelled  by  Jefferson,  when  French 
minister,  from  the  Maison  Carrie.  Standing 
before  it,  he  might  admire  undisturbed  the 
Grecian  outline  of  its  exterior;  but  he  found 
himself  forbidden  to  enter,  save  by  passing  an 
armed  and  uniformed  sentinel  at  the  doorway. 
No  other  State  of  the  Union  then  found  it 
necessary  to  protect  its  State  House  by  a  per 
manent  cordon  of  bayonets.  Yet  there  for  half 


214  TRAVELLERS   AND  OUTLAWS 

a  century  stood  sentinel  the  "  Public  Guard  " 
of  Virginia;  and  when  the  traveller  asked 
the  origin  of  the  precaution,  he  was  told 
that  it  was  the  lasting  memorial  of  Gabriel's 
Defeat. 