DENMARK   VESEY 

Saturday  afternoon,  May  25,  1822,  a 
slave  named  Devany,  belonging  to  Col. 
Prioleau  of  Charleston,  S.C.,  was  sent  to 
market  by  his  mistress,  —  the  colonel  being 
absent  in  the  country.  After  doing  his  errands, 
he  strolled  down  upon  the  wharves  in  the 
enjoyment  of  that  magnificent  wealth  of  lei 
sure  which  usually  characterized  the  former 
"house-servant"  of  the  South,  when  beyond 
hail  of  the  street-door.  He  presently  noticed  a 
small  vessel  lying  in  the  stream,  with  a  peculiar 
flag  flying ;  and  while  looking  at  it,  he  was 
accosted  by  a  slave  named  William,  belonging 
to  Mr.  John  Paul,  who  remarked  to  him,  "  I 
have  often  seen  a  flag  with  the  number  76, 
but  never  one  with  the  number  96  upon  it  be 
fore."  After  some  further  conversation  on  this 
trifling  point,  William  suddenly  inquired,  "  Do 

215 


216  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

you  know  that  something  serious  is  about  to 
take  place?"  Devany  disclaiming  the  knowl 
edge  of  any  graver  impending  crisis  than  the 
family  dinner,  the  other  went  on  to  inform 
him  that  many  of  the  slaves  were  "  determined 
to  right  themselves."  "We  are  determined," 
he  added,  "to  shake  off  our  bondage,  and  for 
that  purpose  we  stand  on  a  good  foundation  ; 
many  have  joined,  and  if  you  will  go  with  me, 
I  will  show  you  the  man  who  has  the  list  of 
names,  and  who  will  take  yours  down." 

This  startling  disclosure  was  quite  too  much 
for  Devany :  he  was  made  of  the  wrong  mate 
rial  for  so  daring  a  project;  his  genius  was 
culinary,  not  revolutionary.  Giving  some 
excuse  for  breaking  off  the  conversation,  he 
went  forthwith  to  consult  a  free  colored  man, 
named  Pensil  or  Pencell,  who  advised  him  to 
warn  his  master  instantly.  So  he  lost  no  time 
in  telling  the  secret  to  his  mistress  and  her 
young  son ;  and  on  the  return  of  Col.  Prioleau 
from  the  country,  five  days  afterward,  it  was 
at  once  revealed  to  him.  Within  an  hour  or 
two  he  stated  the  facts  to  Mr.  Hamilton,  the 


DENMARK  VESEY  217 

intendant,  or,  as  he  would  now  be  called, 
mayor;  Mr.  Hamilton  at  once  summoned  the 
corporation,  and  by  five  o'clock  Devany  and 
William  were  under  examination. 

This  was  the  first  warning  of  a  plot  which 
ultimately  filled  Charleston  with  terror.  And 
yet  so  thorough  and  so  secret  was  the  organiza 
tion  of  the  negroes,  that  a  fortnight  passed 
without  yielding  the  slightest  information 
beyond  the  very  little  which  was  obtained 
from  these  two.  William  Paul  was,  indeed, 
put  in  confinement,  and  soon  gave  evidence 
inculpating  two  slaA^es  as  his  employers,  — 
Mingo  Harth  and  Peter  Poyas.  But  these 
men,  when  arrested,  behaved  with  such  perfect 
coolness,  and  treated  the  charge  with  such 
entire  levity ;  —  their  trunks  and  premises, 
when  searched,  were  so  innocent  of  all  alarming 
contents ;  —  that  they  were  soon  discharged  by 
the  wardens.  William  Paul  at  length  became 
alarmed  for  his  own  safety,  and  began  to  let 
out  further  facts  piecemeal,  and  to  inculpate 
other  men.  But  some  of  those  very  men  came 
voluntarily  to  the  intendant,  on  hearing  that 


218  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

they  were  suspected,  and  indignantly  offered 
themselves  for  examination.  Puzzled  and 
bewildered,  the  municipal  government  kept 
the  thing  as  secret  as  possible,  placed  the  city 
guard  in  an  efficient  condition,  provided  sixteen 
hundred  rounds  of  ball  cartridges,  and  ordered 
the  sentinels  and  patrols  to  be  armed  with 
loaded  muskets.  "  Such  had  been  our  fancied 
security,  that  the  guard  had  previously  gone 
on  duty  without  muskets,  and  with  only 
sheathed  bayonets  and  bludgeons." 

It  has  since  been  asserted,  though  perhaps 
on  questionable  authority,  that  the  Secretary  of 
War  was  informed  of  the  plot,  even  including 
some  details  of  the  plan  and  the  leader's  name, 
before  it  was  known  in  Charleston.  If  so,  he 
utterly  disregarded  it ;  and,  indeed,  so  well  did 
the  negroes  play  their  part,  that  the  whole 
report  was  eventually  disbelieved,  while  —  as 
was  afterwards  proved  —  they  went  on  to  com 
plete  their  secret  organization,  and  hastened  by 
a  fortnight  the  appointed  day  of  attack.  Un 
fortunately  for  their  plans,  however,  another 
betrayal  took  place  at  the  very  last  moment, 


DENMARK   VESEY  219 

from  a  different  direction.  A  class-leader  in  a 
Methodist  church  had  been  persuaded  or  bribed 
by  his  master  to  procure  further  disclosures. 
He  at  length  came  and  stated,  that,  about 
three  months  before,  a  man  named  Rolla, 
slave  of  Gov.  Bennett,  had  communicated  to 
a  friend  of  his  the  fact  of  an  intended  insur 
rection,  and  had  said  that  the  time  fixed  for 
the  outbreak  was  the  following  Sunday  night, 
June  16.  As  this  conversation  took  place  on 
Friday,  it  gave  but  a  very  short  time  for  the 
city  authorities  to  act,  especially  as  they  wished 
neither  to  endanger  the  city  nor  to  alarm  it. 

Yet  so  cautiously  was  the  game  played  on 
both  sides  that  the  whole  thing  was  still  kept 
a  secret  from  the  Charleston  public  ;  and  some 
members  of  the  city  government  did  not  fully 
appreciate  their  danger  till  they  had  passed  it. 
"  The  whole  was  concealed,"  wrote  the  governor 
afterwards,  "  until  the  time  came ;  but  secret 
preparations  were  made.  Saturday  night  and 
Sunday  morning  passed  without  demonstra 
tions  ;  doubts  were  excited,  and  counter  orders 
issued  for  diminishing  the  guard."  It  after- 


220  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

wards  proved  that  these  preparations  showed 
to  the  slaves  that  their  plot  was  betrayed,  and 
so  saved  the  city  without  public  alarm.  News 
paper  correspondence  soon  was  full  of  the 
story,  each  informant  of  course  hinting  plainly 
that  he  had  been  behind  the  scenes  all  along, 
and  had  withheld  it  only  to  gratify  the  authori 
ties  in  their  policy  of  silence.  It  was  "  now 
no  longer  a  secret,"  they  wrote  ;  adding,  that, 
for  five  or  six  weeks,  but  little  attention  had 
been  paid  by  the  community  to  these  rumors, 
the  city  council  having  kept  it  carefully  to 
themselves  until  a  number  of  suspicious  slaves 
had  been  arrested.  This  refers  to  ten  prisoners 
who  were  seized  on  June  18,  an  arrest  which 
killed  the  plot,  and  left  only  the  terrors  of 
what  might  have  been.  The  investigation, 
thus  publicly  commenced,  soon  revealed  a  free 
colored  man  named  Denmark  Vesey  as  the 
leader  of  the  enterprise,  —  among  his  chief 
coadjutors  being  that  innocent  Peter  and  that 
unsuspecting  Mingo  who  had  been  examined 
and  discharged  nearly  three  weeks  before. 
It  is  matter  of  demonstration,  that,  but  for 


DENMARK   VESEY  221 

the  military  preparations  on  the  appointed 
Sunday  night,  the  attempt  would  have  been 
made.  The  ringleaders  had  actually  met  for 
their  final  arrangements,  when,  by  comparing 
notes,  they  found  themselves  foiled ;  and  within 
another  week  they  were  prisoners  on  trial. 
Nevertheless,  the  plot  which  they  had  laid  was 
the  most  elaborate  insurrectionary  project  ever 
formed  by  American  slaves,  and  came  the  near 
est  to  a  terrible  success.  In  boldness  of  con 
ception  and  thoroughness  of  organization  there 
has  been  nothing  to  compare  with  it ;  and  it  is 
worth  while  to  dwell  somewhat  upon  its  details, 
first  introducing  the  dramatis  personce. 

Denmark  Vesey  had  come  very  near  figuring 
as  a  revolutionist  in  Hayti,  instead  of  South 
Carolina.  Capt.  Vesey,  an  old  resident  of 
Charleston,  commanded  a  ship  that  traded 
between  St.  Thomas  and  Cape  Fran^ais,  during 
our  Revolutionary  War,  in  the  slave-transporta 
tion  line.  In  the  year  1781  he  took  on  board  a 
cargo  of  three  hundred  and  ninety  slaves,  and 
sailed  for  the  Cape.  On  the  passage,  he  and 
his  officers  were  much  attracted  by  the  beauty 


222  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

and  intelligence  of  a  boy  of  fourteen,  whom 
they  unanimously  adopted  into  the  cabin  as  a 
pet.  They  gave  him  new  clothes,  and  a  new 
name,  Telemaque,  which  was  afterwards  grad 
ually  corrupted  into  Telmak  and  Denmark. 
They  amused  themselves  with  him  until  their 
arrival  at  Cape  Frangais,  and  then,  "  having 
no  use  for  the  boy,"  sold  their  pet  as  if  he  had 
been  a  macaw  or  a  monkey.  Capt.  Vesey 
sailed  for  St.  Thomas ;  and,  presently  making 
another  trip  to  Cape  Frangais,  was  surprised 
to  hear  from  his  consignee  that  Telemaque 
would  be  returned  on  his  hands  as  being 
"  unsound,"  —  not  in  theology  nor  in  morals, 
but  in  body,  —  subject  to  epileptic  fits,  in  fact. 
According  to  the  custom  of  that  place,  the 
boy  was  examined  by  the  city  physician,  who 
required  Capt.  Vesey  to  take  him  back;  and 
Denmark  served  him  faithfully,  with  no  trouble 
from  epilepsy,  for  twenty  years,  travelling  all 
over  the  world  with  him,  and  learning  to  speak 
various  languages.  In  1800  he  drew  a  prize  of 
fifteen  hundred  dollars  in  the  East  Bay-street 
Lottery,  with  which  he  bought  his  freedom 


DENMARK  VESEY  223 

from  his  master  for  six  hundred  dollars,  — 
much  less  than  his  market  value.  From  that 
time,  the  official  report  says,  he  worked  as  a 
carpenter  in  Charleston,  distinguished  for  physi 
cal  strength  and  energy.  "  Among  those  of  his 
color  he  was  looked  up  to  with  awe  and  respect. 
His  temper  was  impetuous  and  domineering  in 
the  extreme,  qualifying  him  for  the  despotic 
rule  of  which  he  was  ambitious.  All  his  pas 
sions  were  ungovernable  and  savage ;  and  to 
his  numerous  wives  and  children  he  displayed 
the  haughty  and  capricious  cruelty  of  an  East 
ern  bashaw." 

"For  several  years  before  he  disclosed  his 
intentions  to  any  one,  he  appears  to  have  been 
constantly  and  assiduously  engaged  in  endeav 
oring  to  imbitter  the  minds  of  the  colored  popu 
lation  against  the  white.  He  rendered  himself 
perfectly  familiar  with  all  those  parts  of  the 
Scriptures  which  he  thought  he  could  pervert 
to  his  purpose,  and  would  readily  quote  them 
to  prove  that  slavery  was  contrary  to  the 
laws  of  God ;  that  slaves  were  bound  to 
attempt  their  emancipation,  however  shocking 


224  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

and  bloody  might  be  the  consequences ;  and 
that  such  efforts  would  not  only  be  pleasing 
to  the  Almighty,  but  were  absolutely  enjoined, 
and  their  success  predicted,  in  the  Scriptures. 
His  favorite  texts  when  he  addressed  those  of 
his  own  color  were  Zech.  xiv.  1-3,  and  Josh, 
vi.  21 ;  and  in  all  his  conversations  he  identi 
fied  their  situation  with  that  of  the  Israelites. 
The  number  of  inflammatory  pamphlets  on 
slavery  brought  into  Charleston  from  some  of 
our  sister  States  within  the  last  four  years 
(and  once  from  Sierra  Leone),  and  distributed 
amongst  the  colored  population  of  the  city, 
for  which  there  was  a  great  facility,  in  conse 
quence  of  the  unrestricted  intercourse  allowed 
to  persons  of  color  between  the  different  States 
in  the  Union,  and  the  speeches  in  Congress 
of  those  opposed  to  the  admission  of  Missouri 
into  the  Union,  perhaps  garbled  and  misrepre 
sented,  furnished  him  with  ample  means  for 
inflaming  the  minds  of  the  colored  population 
of  the  State  ;  and  by  distorting  certain  parts 
of  those  speeches,  or  selecting  from  them 
particular  passages,  he  persuaded  but  too  many 


DENMARK  VESEY  225 

that  Congress  had  actually  declared  them  free, 
and  that  they  were  held  in  bondage  contrary 
to  the  laws  of  the  land.  Even  whilst  walking 
through  the  streets  in  company  with  another, 
he  was  not  idle ;  for  if  his  companion  bowed 
to  a  white  person,  he  would  rebuke  him,  and 
observe  that  all  men  were  born  equal,  and  that 
he  was  surprised  that  any  one  would  degrade 
himself  by  such  conduct ;  that  he  would  never 
cringe  to  the  whites,  nor  ought  any  one  who 
had  the  feelings  of  a  man.  When  answered, 
4  We  are  slaves,1  he  would  sarcastically  and 
indignantly  reply,  '  You  deserve  to  remain 
slaves ; '  and  if  he  were  further  asked,  '  What 
can  we  do  ? '  he  would  remark,  4  Go  and  buy  a 
spelling-book,  and  read  the  fable  of  Hercules 
and  the  Wagoner,'  which  he  would  then  repeat, 
and  apply  it  to  their  situation.  He  also  sought 
every  opportunity  of  entering  into  conversa 
tion  with  white  persons,  when  they  could  be 
overheard  by  negroes  near  by,  especially  in 
grog-shops,  —  during  which  conversation  he 
would  artfully  introduce  some  bold  remark  on 
slavery ;  and  sometimes,  when,  from  the  char- 


226  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

acter  he  was  conversing  with,  he  found  he 
might  still  be  bolder,  he  would  go  so  far,  that, 
had  not  his  declarations  in  such  situations  been 
clearly  proved,  they  would  scarcely  have  been 
credited.  He  continued  this  course  until  some 
time  after  the  commencement  of  the  last 
winter ;  by  which  time  he  had  not  only 
obtained  incredible  influence  amongst  persons 
of  color,  but  many  feared  him  more  than  their 
owners,  and,  one  of  them  declared,  even  more 
than  his  God." 

It  was  proved  against  him,  that  his  house 
had  been  the  principal  place  of  meeting  for 
the  conspirators,  that  all  the  others  habitually 
referred  to  him  as  the  leader,  and  that  he  had 
shown  great  address  in  dealing  with  different 
temperaments  and  overcoming  a  variety  of 
scruples.  One  witness  testified  that  Vesey  had 
read  to  him  from  the  Bible  about  the  deliver 
ance  of  the  children  of  Israel;  another,  that 
he  had  read  to  him  a  speech  which  had  been 
delivered  "  in  Congress  by  a  Mr.  King  "  on  the 
subject  of  slavery,  and  Vesey  had  said  that 
"this  Mr.  King  was  the  black  man's  friend; 


DENMARK  VESEY  227 

that  he,  Mr.  King,  had  declared  he  would  con 
tinue  to  speak,  write,  and  publish  pamphlets 
against  slavery  the  longest  day  he  lived,  until 
the  Southern  States  consented  to  emancipate 
their  slaves,  for  that  slavery  was  a  great  dis 
grace  to  the  country."  But  among  all  the 
reports  there  are  only  two  sentences  which 
really  reveal  the  secret  soul  of  Denmark  Vesey, 
and  show  his  impulses  and  motives.  "  He  said 
he  did  not  go  with  Creighton  to  Africa,  because 
he  had  not  a  will ;  he  wanted  to  stay  and  see 
what  he  could  do  for  his  fellow-creatures." 
The  other  takes  us  still  nearer  home.  Monday 
Gell  stated  in  his  confession,  that  Vesey,  on 
first  broaching  the  plan  to  him,  said  "he  was 
satisfied  with  his  own  condition,  being  free ; 
but,  as  all  his  children  were  slaves,  he  wished 
to  see  what  could  be  done  for  them." 

It  is  strange  to  turn  from  this  simple  state 
ment  of  a  perhaps  intelligent  preference,  on 
the  part  of  a  parent,  for  seeing  his  offspring  in 
a  condition  of  freedom,  to  the  naive  astonish 
ment  of  his  judges.  "  It  is  difficult  to  imagine," 
says  the  sentence  finally  passed  on  Denmark 


228  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

Vesey,  "  what  infatuation  could  have  prompted 
you  to  attempt  an  enterprise  so  wild  and 
visionary.  You  were  a  free  man,  comparatively 
wealthy,  and  enjoyed  every  comfort  compatible 
with  your  situation.  You  had,  therefore,  much 
to  risk  and  little  to  gain."  Yet  one  witness 
testified :  "  Vesey  said  the  negroes  were  living 
such  an  abominable  life,  they  ought  to  rise. 
I  said,  I  was  living  well ;  he  said,  though  I  was, 
others  were  not,  and  that  'twas  such  fools  as 
I  that  were  in  the  way  and  would  not  help 
them,  and  that  after  all  things  were  well  he 
would  mark  me."  "  His  general  conversation," 
said  another  witness,  a  white  boy,  "  was  about 
religion,  which  he  would  apply  to  slavery ;  as, 
for  instance,  he  would  speak  of  the  creation 
of  the  world,  in  which  he  would  say  all  men 
had  equal  rights,  blacks  as  well  as  whites,  etc. ; 
all  his  religious  remarks  were  mingled  with 
slavery."  And  the  firmness  of  this  purpose 
did  not  leave  him,  even  after  the  betrayal  of 
his  cherished  plans.  "  After  the  plot  was  dis 
covered,"  said  Monday  Gell,  in  his  confession, 
"  Vesey  said  it  was  all  over,  unless  an  attempt 


DENMARK  VESEY  229 

were  made  to  rescue  those  who  might  be  con 
demned,  by  rushing  on  the  .people  and  saving 
the  prisoners,  or  all  dying  together." 

The  only  person  to  divide  with  Vesey  the 
claim  of  leadership  was  Peter  Poyas.  Vesey 
was  the  missionary  of  the  cause,  but  Peter  was 
the  organizing  mind.  He  kept  the  register 
of  "candidates,"  and  decided  who  should  or 
should  not  be  enrolled.  "We  can't  live  so," 
he  often  reminded  his  confederates  ;  "  we  must 
break  the  yoke."  "  God  has  a  hand  in  it ;  we 
have  been  meeting  for  four  years,  and  are  not 
yet  betrayed."  Peter  was  a  ship-carpenter,  and 
a  slave  of  great  value.  He  was  to  be  the 
military  leader.  His  plans  showed  some  natural 
generalship :  he  arranged  the  night-attack ;  he 
planned  the  enrolment  of  a  mounted  troop  to 
scour  the  streets ;  and  he  had  a  list  of  all  the 
shops  where  arms  and  ammunition  were  kept 
for  sale.  He  voluntarily  undertook  the  man 
agement  of  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  enter 
prise,  —  the  capture  of  the  main  guard-house, 
—  and  had  pledged  himself  to  advance  alone 
and  surprise  the  sentinel.  He  was  said  to  have 


230  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

a  magnetism  in  his  eyes,  of  which  his  confed 
erates  stood  in  great  awe ;  if  he  once  got  his 
eye  upon  a  man,  there  was  no  resisting  it. 
A  white  witness  has  since  narrated,  that,  after 
his  arrest,  he  was  chained  to  the  floor  in  a 
cell,  with  another  of  the  conspirators.  Men  in 
authority  came,  and  sought  by  promises,  threats, 
and  even  tortures,  to  ascertain  the  names  of 
other  accomplices.  His  companion,  wearied 
out  with  pain  and  suffering,  and  stimulated 
by  the  hope  of  saving  his  own  life,  at  last 
began  to  yield.  Peter  raised  himself,  leaned 
upon  his  elbow,  looked  at  the  poor  fellow,  say 
ing  quietly,  "Die  like  a  man,"  and  instantly 
lay  down  again.  It  was  enough;  not  another 
word  was  extorted. 

One  of  the  most  notable  individuals  in  the 
plot  was  a  certain  Jack  Purcell,  commonly 
called  Gullah  Jack,  —  Gullah  signifying  An 
gola,  the  place  of  his  origin.  A  conjurer  by 
profession  and  by  lineal  heritage  in  his  own 
country,  he  had  resumed  the  practice  of  his 
vocation  on  this  side  the  Atlantic.  For  fifteen 
years  he  had  wielded  in  secret  an  immense 


DENMARK  VESEY  231 

influence  among  a  sable  constituency  in  Charles 
ton;  and  as  he  had  the  reputation  of  being 
invulnerable,  and  of  teaching  invulnerability 
as  an  art,  he  was  very  good  at  beating  up 
recruits  for  insurrection.  Over  those  of  Ango- 
lese  descent,  especially,  he  was  a  perfect  king, 
and  made  them  join  in  the  revolt  as  one  man. 
They  met  him  monthly  at  a  place  called  Bulk- 
ley's  Farm,  selected  because  the  black  overseer 
on  that  plantation  was  one  of  the  initiated,  and 
because  the  farm  was  accessible  by  water,  thus 
enabling  them  to  elude  the  patrol.  There  they 
prepared  cartridges  and  pikes,  and  had  primi 
tive  banquets,  which  assumed  a  melodramatic 
character  under  the  inspiriting  guidance  of 
Jack.  If  a  fowl  was  privately  roasted,  that 
mystic  individual  muttered  incantations  over 
it;  and  then  they  all  grasped  at  it,  exclaim 
ing,  "  Thus  we  pull  Buckra  to  pieces !  "  He 
gave  them  parched  corn  and  ground-nuts  to 
be  eaten  as  internal  safeguards  on  the  day 
before  the  outbreak,  and  a  consecrated  cullah, 
or  crab's  claw,  to  be  carried  in  the  mouth  by 
each,  as  an  amulet.  These  rather  questionable 


232  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

means  secured  him  a  power  which  was  very 
unquestionable ;  the  witnesses  examined  in  his 
presence  all  showed  dread  of  his  conjurations, 
and  referred  to  him  indirectly,  with  a  kind  of 
awe,  as  "the  little  man  who  can't  be  shot." 

When  Gullah  Jack  was  otherwise  engaged, 
there  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  deputy  seer 
employed  in  the  enterprise,  a  blind  man  named 
Philip.  He  was  a  preacher ;  was  said  to  have 
been  born  with  a  caul  on  his  head,  and  so 
claimed  the  gift  of  second-sight.  Timid  adhe 
rents  were  brought  to  his  house  for  ghostly 
counsel.  "  Why  do  you  look  so  timorous  ? " 
he  said  to  William  Garner,  and  then  quoted 
Scripture,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled." 
That  a  blind  man  should  know  how  he  looked, 
was  beyond  the  philosophy  of  the  visitor ;  and 
this  piece  of  rather  cheap  ingenuity  carried  the 
day. 

Other  leaders  were  appointed  also.  Monday 
Gell  was  the  scribe  of  the  enterprise ;  he  was 
a  native  African,  who  had  learned  to  read  and 
write.  He  was  by  trade  a  harness-maker,  work 
ing  chiefly  on  his  own  account.  He  confessed 


DENMARK   VESEY  233 

that  he  had  written  a  letter  to  President  Boyer 
of  the  new  black  republic ;  "  the  letter  was 
about  the  sufferings  of  the  blacks,  and  to  know 
if  the  people  of  St.  Domingo  would  help  them 
if  they  made  an  effort  to  free  themselves." 
This  epistle  was  sent  by  the  black  cook  of 
a  Northern  schooner,  and  the  envelope  was 
addressed  to  a  relative  of  the  bearer. 

Tom  Russell  was  the  armorer,  and  made 
pikes  "  on  a  very  improved  model,"  the  official 
report  admits.  Polydore  Faber  fitted  the 
weapons  with  handles.  Bacchus  Hammett  had 
charge  of  the  fire-arms  and  ammunition,  not  as 
yet  a  laborious  duty.  William  Garner  and 
Mingo  Harth  were  to  lead  the  horse-company. 
Lot  Forrester  was  the  courier,  and  had  done, 
no  one  ever  knew  how  much,  in  the  way  of 
enlisting  country  negroes,  of  whom  Ned 
Bennett  was  to  take  command  when  enlisted. 
Being  the  governor's  servant,  Ned  was  prob 
ably  credited  with  some  official  experience. 
These  were  the  officers:  now  for  the  plan  of 
attack. 

It   was   the   custom   then,   as   later,  for  the 


234  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

country  negroes  to  flock  largely  into  Charles 
ton  on  Sunday.  More  than  a  thousand  came, 
on  ordinary  occasions,  and  a  far  larger  number 
might  at  any  time  make  their  appearance  with 
out  exciting  any  suspicion.  They  gathered  in, 
especially  by  water,  from  the  opposite  sides  of 
Ashley  and  Cooper  Rivers,  and  from  the  neigh 
boring  islands ;  and  they  came  in  a  great  num 
ber  of  canoes  of  various  sizes,  —  many  of  which 
could  carry  a  hundred  men,  —  which  were 
ordinarily  employed  in  bringing  agricultural 
products  to  the  Charleston  market.  To  get 
an  approximate  knowledge  of  the  number,-  the 
city  government  once  ordered  the  persons  thus 
arriving  to  be  counted,  —  and  that  during  the 
progress  of  the  trials,  at  a  time  when  the  negroes 
were  rather  fearful  of  coming  into  town ;  and 
it  was  found,  that,  even  then,  there  were  more 
than  five  hundred  visitors  on  a  single  Sunday. 
This  fact,  then,  was  the  essential  point  in  the 
plan  of  insurrection.  Whole  plantations  were 
found  to  have  been  enlisted  among  the  "  candi 
dates,"  as  they  were  termed ;  and  it  was  proved 
that  the  city  negroes,  who  lived  nearest  the 


DENMARK   VESEY  235 

place  of  meeting,  had  agreed  to  conceal  these 
confederates  in  their  houses  to  a  large  extent, 
on  the  night  of  the  proposed  outbreak. 

The  details  of  the  plan,  however,  were  not 
rashly  committed  to  the  mass  of  the  confeder 
ates  ;  they  were  known  only  to  a  few,  and  were 
finally  to  be  announced  only  after  the  even 
ing  prayer-meetings  on  the  appointed  Sunday. 
But  each  leader  had  his  own  company  enlisted, 
and  his  own  work  marked  out.  When  the 
clock  struck  twelve,  all  were  to  move.  Peter 
Poyas  was  to  lead  a  party  ordered  to  assemble 
at  South  Bay,  and  to  be  joined  by  a  force  from 
James's  Island ;  he  was  then  to  march  up  and 
seize  the  arsenal  and  guard-house  opposite  St. 
Michael's  Church,  and  detach  a  sufficient  num 
ber  to  cut  off.  all  white  citizens  who  should 
appear  at  the  alarm-posts.  A  second  body  of 
negroes,  from  the  country  and  the  Neck,  headed 
by  Ned  Bennett,  was  to  assemble  on  the  Neck, 
and  seize  the  arsenal  there.  A  third  was  to 
meet  at  Gov.  Bennett's  Mills,  under  command 
of  Rolla,  and,  after  putting  the  governor  and 
intendant  to  death,  to  march  through  the  city, 


236       TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

or  be  posted  at  Cannon's  Bridge,  thus  prevent 
ing  the  inhabitants  of  Cannonsborough  from 
entering  the  city.  A  fourth,  partly  from  the 
country,  and  partly  from  the  neighboring  local 
ities  in  the  city,  was  to  rendezvous  on  Gadsden's 
Wharf,  and  attack  the  upper  guard-house. 
A  fifth,  composed  of  country  and  Neck  negroes, 
was  to  assemble  at  Bulkley's  Farm,  two  miles 
and  a  half  from  the  city,  seize  the  upper  powder- 
magazine,  and  then  march  down ;  and  a  sixth 
was  to  assemble  at  Denmark  Vesey's,  and  obey 
his  orders.  A  seventh  detachment,  under 
Gullah  Jack,  was  to  assemble  in  Boundary 
Street,  at  the  head  of  King  Street,  to  capture 
the  arms  of  the  Neck  company  of  militia,  and 
to  take  an  additional  supply  from  Mr.  Duquer- 
cron's  shop.  The  naval  stores  on  Mey's  Wharf 
were  also  to  be  attacked.  Meanwhile,  a  horse- 
company,  consisting  of  many  draymen,  hostlers, 
and  butcher-boys,  was  to  meet  at  Lightwood's 
Alley,  and  then  scour  the  streets  to  prevent 
the  whites  from  assembling.  Every  white  man 
coming  out  of  his  own  door  was  to  be  killed ; 
and,  if  necessary,  the  city  was  to  be  fired  in 


DENMARK   VESEY  237 

several  places,  —  slow-match  for  this  purpose 
having  been  purloined  from  the  public  arsenal, 
and  placed  in  an  accessible  position. 

Beyond  this,  the  plan  of  action  was  either 
unformed  or  undiscovered;  some  slight  reliance 
seems  to  have  been  placed  on  English  aid, — 
more  on  assistance  from  St.  Domingo.  At  any 
rate,  all  the  ships  in  the  harbor  were  to  be 
seized;  and  in  these,  if  the  worst  came  to  the 
worst,  those  most  deeply  inculpated  could  set 
sail,  bearing  with  them,  perhaps,  the  spoils  of 
shops  and  of  banks.  It  seems  to  be  admitted  by 
the  official  narrative,  that  they  might  have  been 
able,  at  that  season  of  the  year,  and  with  the 
aid  of  the  fortifications  on  the  Neck  and  around 
the  harbor,  to  retain  possession  of  the  city  for 
some  time. 

So  unsuspicious  were  the  authorities,  so  un 
prepared  the  citizens,  so  open  to  attack  lay  the 
city,  that  nothing  seemed  necessary  to  the  suc 
cess  of  the  insurgents  except  organization  and 
arms.  Indeed,  the  plan  of  organization  easily 
covered  a  supply  of  arms.  By  their  own  con 
tributions  they  had  secured  enough  to  strike 


338  TRAVELLERS   AND    OUTLAWS 

the  first  blow,  —  a  few  hundred  pikes  and  dag 
gers,  together  with  swords  and  guns  for  the 
leaders.  But  they  had  carefully  marked  every 
place  in  the  city  where  weapons  were  to  be 
obtained.  On  King-street  Road,  beyond  the 
municipal  limits,  in  a  common  wooden  shop, 
were  left  unguarded  the  arms  of  the  Neck 
company  of  militia,  to  the  number  of  several 
hundred  stand ;  and  these  were  to  be  secured 
by  Bacchus  Hammett,  whose  master  kept  the 
establishment.  In  Mr.  Duquercron's  shop 
there  were  deposited  for  sale  as  many  more 
weapons;  and  they  had  noted  Mr.  Schirer's 
shop  in  Queen  Street,  and  other  gunsmiths' 
establishments.  Finally,  the  State  arsenal  in 
Meeting  Street,  a  building  with  no  defences 
except  ordinary  wooden  doors,  was  to  be  seized 
early  in  the  outbreak.  Provided,  therefore, 
that  the  first  moves  proved  successful,  all  the 
rest  appeared  sure. 

Very  little  seems  to  have  been  said  among 
the  conspirators  in  regard  to  any  plans  of  riot 
or  debauchery,  subsequent  to  the  capture  of 
the  city.  Either  their  imaginations  did  not 


DENMARK  VESEY  239 

dwell  on  them,  or  the  witnesses  did  not  dare 
to  give  testimony,  or  the  authorities  to  print 
it.  Death  was  to  be  dealt  out,  comprehensive 
and  terrible ;  but  nothing  more  is  mentioned. 
One  prisoner,  Rolla,  is  reported  in  the  evidence 
to  have  dropped  hints  in  regard  to  the  destiny 
of  the  women  ;  and  there  was  a  rumor  in  the 
newspapers  of  the  time,  that  he  or  some  other 
of  Gov.  Bennett's  slaves  was  to  have  taken 
the  governor's  daughter,,  a  young  girl  of  six 
teen,  for  his  wife,  in  the  event  of  success ;  but 
this  is  all.  On  the  other  hand,  Denmark 
Vesey  was  known  to  be  for  a  war  of  imme 
diate  and  total  extermination ;  and  when  some 
of  the  company  opposed  killing  "  the  ministers 
and  the  women  and  children,"  Vesey  read  from 
the  Scriptures  that  all  should  be  cut  off,  and 
said  that  "  it  was  for  their  safety  not  to  leave 
one  white  skin  alive,  for  this  was  the  plan  they 
pursued  at  St.  Domingo."  And  all  this  was 
not  a  mere  dream  of  one  lonely  enthusiast,  but 
a  measure  which  had  been  maturing  for  four 
full  years  among  several  confederates,  and  had 
been  under  discussion  for  five  months  among 
multitudes  of  initiated  "  candidates." 


240  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

As  usual  with  slave-insurrections,  the  best 
men  and  those  most  trusted  were  deepest  in 
the  plot.  Rolla  was  the  only  prominent  con 
spirator  who  was  not  an  active  church-member. 
"Most  of  the  ringleaders,"  says  a  Charleston 
letter-writer  of  that  day,  "were  the  rulers  or 
class-leaders  in  what  is  called  the  African 
Society,  and  were  considered  faithful,  honest 
fellows.  Indeed,  many  of  the  owners  could 
not  be  convinced,  till  the  fellows  confessed 
themselves,  that  they  were  concerned,  and  that 
the  first  object  of  all  was  to  kill  their  masters." 
And  the  first  official  report  declares  that  it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  assign  a  motive  for 
the  insurrectionists,  "  if  it  had  not  been  dis 
tinctly  proved,  that,  with  scarcely  an  exception, 
they  had  no  individual  hardship  to  complain 
of,  and  were  among  the  most  humanely  treated 
negroes  in  the  city.  The  facilities  for  combin 
ing  and  confederating  in  such  a  scheme  -  were 
amply  afforded  by  the  extreme  indulgence  and 
kindness  which  characterize  the  domestic 
treatment  of  our  slaves.  Many  slave-owners 
among  us,  not  satisfied  with  ministering  to  the 


DENMARK  VESEY  241 

wants  of  their  domestics  by  all  the  comforts  of 
abundant  food  and  excellent  clothing,  with  a 
misguided  benevolence  have  not  only  permitted 
their  instruction,  but  lent  to  such  efforts  their 
approbation  and  applause." 

"  I  sympathize  most  sincerely,"  says  the 
anonymous  author  of  a  pamphlet  of  the  period, 
"  with  the  very  respectable  and  pious  clergy 
man  whose  heart  must  still  bleed  at  the  recol- 
letion  that  his  confidential  class-leader,  but  a 
week  or  two  before  his  just  conviction,  had 
received  the  communion  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
from  his  hand.  This  wretch  had  been  brought 
up  in  his  pastor's  family,  and  was  treated  with 
the  same  Christian  attention  as  was  shown  to 
their  own  children."  "  To  us  who  are  accus 
tomed  to  the  base  and  proverbial  ingratitude 
of  these  people,  this  ill  return  of  kindness  and 
confidence  is  not  surprising ;  but  they  who  are 
ignorant  of  their  real  character  will  read  and 
wonder." 

One  demonstration  of  this  "  Christian  atten 
tion  "  had  lately  been  the  closing  of  the  African 
Church,  —  of  which,  as  has  been  stated,  most 


242  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

of  the  leading  revolutionists  were  members,  — 
on  the  ground  that  it  tended  to  spread  the 
dangerous  infection  of  the  alphabet.  On  Jan. 
15,  1821,  the  city  marshal,  John  J.  Lafar,  had 
notified  "  ministers  of  the  gospel  and  others 
who  keep  night-  and  Sunday-schools  for  slaves, 
that  the  education  of  such  persons  is  forbidden 
by  law,  and  that  the  city  government  feel 
imperiously  bound  to  enforce  the  penalty." 
So  that  there  were  some  special  as  well  as 
general  grounds  for  disaffection  among  these 
ungrateful  favorites  of  fortune,  the  slaves. 
Then  there  were  fancied  dangers.  An  absurd 
report  had  somehow  arisen,  —  since  you  cannot 
keep  men  ignorant  without  making  them  un 
reasonable  also,  —  that  on  the  ensuing  Fourth 
of  July  the  whites  were  to  create  a  false  alarm, 
and  that  every  black  man  coming  out  was  to 
be  killed,  "  in  order  to  thin  them ; "  this  being 
done  to  prevent  their  joining  an  imaginary 
army  supposed  to  be  on  its  way  from  Hayti. 
Others  were  led  to  suppose  that  Congress  had 
ended  the  Missouri  Compromise  discussion  by 
making  them  all  free,  and  that  the  law  would 


DENMARK  VESEY  243 

protect  their  liberty  if  they  could  only  secure 
it.  Others,  again,  were  threatened  with  the 
vengeance  of  the  conspirators,  unless  they  also 
joined;  on  the  night  of  attack,  it  was  said,  the 
initiated  would  have  a  countersign,  and  all  who 
did  not  know  it  would  share  the  fate  of  the 
whites.  Add  to  this  the  reading  of  Congres 
sional  speeches,  and  of  the  copious  magazine  of 
revolution  to  be  found  in  the  Bible,  —  and  it 
was  no  wonder,  if  they  for  the  first  time  were 
roused,  under  the  energetic  leadership  of  Vesey, 
to  a  full  consciousness  of  their  own  condition. 

"  Not  only  Avere  the  leaders  of  good  character, 
and  very  much  indulged  by  their  owners ;  but 
this  was  very  generally  the  case  with  all  who 
were  convicted,  —  many  of  them  possessing  the 
highest  confidence  of  their  owners,  and  not  one 
of  bad  character."  In  one  case  it  was  proved 
that  Vesey  had  forbidden  his  followers  to  trust 
a  certain  man,  because  he  had  once  been>.seen 
intoxicated.  In  another  case  it  was  shown 
that  a  slave  named  George  had  made  every 
effort  to  obtain  their  confidence,  but  was  con 
stantly  excluded  from  their  meetings  as  a 


244  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

talkative  fellow  who  could  not  be  trusted,  — 
a  policy  which  his  levity  of  manner,  when 
examined  in  court,  fully  justified.  They  took 
no  women  into  counsel,  —  not  from  any  dis 
trust  apparently,  but  in  order  that  their  children 
might  not  be  left  uncared-for  in  case  of  defeat 
and  destruction.  House-servants  were  rarely 
trusted,  or  only  when  they  had  been  carefully 
sounded  by  the  chief  leaders.  Peter  Poyas,  in 
commissioning  an  agent  to  enlist  men,  gave 
him  excellent  cautions :  "  Don't  mention  it  to 
those  waiting-men  who  receive  presents  of  old 
coats,  etc.,  from  their  masters,  or  they'll  betray 
us ;  I  will  speak  to  them."  When  he  did 
speak,  if  he  did  not  convince  them,  he  at  least 
frightened  them.  But  the  chief  reliance  was 
on  those  slaves  Avho  were  hired  out,  and  there 
fore  more  uncontrolled,  —  and  also  upon  the 
country  negroes. 

The  same  far-sighted  policy  directed  the 
conspirators  to  disarm  suspicion  by  peculiarly 
obedient  and  orderly  conduct.  And  it  shows 
the  precaution  with  which  the  thing  was 
carried  on,  that,  although  Peter  Poyas  was 


DENMARK  YESEY  245 

proved  to  have  had  a  list  of  some  six  hundred 
persons,  yet  not  one  of  his  particular  company 
was  ever  brought  to  trial.  As  each  leader 
kept  to  himself  the  names  of  his  proselytes, 
and  as  Monday  Gell  was  the  only  one  of  these 
leaders  who  turned  traitor,  any  opinion  as  to 
the  numbers  actually  engaged  must  be  alto 
gether  conjectural.  One  witness  said  nine 
thousand ;  another,  six  thousand  six  hundred. 
These  statements  were  probably  extravagant, 
though  not  more  so  than  Gov.  Bennett's  asser 
tion,  on  the  other  side,  that  "all  who  were 
actually  concerned  had  been  brought  to  jus 
tice,"  —  unless  by  this  phrase  he  designates 
only  the  ringleaders.  The  avowed  aim  of 
the  governor's  letter,  indeed,  is  to  smooth  the 
thing  over,  for  the  credit  and  safety  of  the 
city;  and  its  evasive  tone  contrasts  strongly 
with  the  more  frank  and  thorough  statements 
of  the  judges,  made  after  the  thing  could  no 
longer  be  hushed  up.  These  high  authorities 
explicitly  acknowledge  that  they  had  failed  to 
detect  more  than  a  small  minority  of  those 
concerned  in  the  project,  and  seem  to  admit, 


246  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

that,  if  it  had  once  been  brought  to  a  head, 
the  slaves  generally  would  have  joined  in. 

"  We  cannot  venture  to  say,"  says  the  inten- 
dant's  pamphlet,  "  to  how  many  the  knowledge 
of  the  intended  effort  was  communicated,  who 
without  signifying  their  assent,  or  attending 
any  of  the  meetings,  were  yet  prepared  to  profit 
by  events.  That  there  are  many  who  would 
not  have  permitted  the  enterprise  to  have 
failed  at  a  critical  moment,  for  the  want  of 
their  co-operation,  we  have  the  best  reason  for 
believing."  So  believed  the  community  at 
large ;  and  the  panic  was  in  proportion,  when 
the  whole  danger  was  finally  made  public. 
"  The  scenes  I  witnessed,"  says  one  who  has 
since  narrated  the  circumstances,  "  and  the 
declaration  of  the  impending  danger  that  met 
us  at  all  times  and  on  all  occasions,  forced  the 
conviction  that  never  were  an  entire  people 
more  thoroughly  alarmed  than  were  the  peo 
ple  of  Charleston  at  that  time.  .  .  .  During  the 
excitement,  and  the  trial  of  the  supposed  con 
spirators,  rumor  proclaimed  all,  and  doubtless 
more  than  all,  the  horrors  of  the  plot.  The 


DENMARK   VESEY  247 

city  was  to  be  fired  in  every  quarter;  the 
arsenal  in  the  immediate  vicinity  was  to  be 
broken  open,  and  the  arms  distributed  to  the 
insurgents,  and  a  universal  massacre  of  the 
white  inhabitants  to  take  place.  Nor  did  there 
seem  to  be  any  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  people, 
that  such  would  actually  have  been  the  result 
had  not  the  plot  fortunately  been  detected 
before  the  time  appointed  for  the  outbreak.  It 
was  believed,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  every 
black  in  the  city  would  join  in  the  insurrection, 
and  that  if  the  original  design  had  been 
attempted,  and  the  city  taken  by  surprise,  the 
negroes  would  have  achieved  a  complete  and 
easy  victory.  Nor  does  it  seem  at  all  impos 
sible  that  such  might  have  been,  or  yet  may 
be,  the  case,  if  any  well-arranged  and  resolute 
rising  should  take  place." 

Indeed,  this  universal  admission,  that  all  the 
slaves  were  ready  to  take  part  in  any  desperate 
enterprise,  was  one  of  the  most  startling  aspects 
of  the  affair.  The  authorities  say  that  the  two 
principal  State's  evidence  declared  that  "  they 
never  spoke  to  any  person  of  color  on  the 


248  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

subject,  or  knew  of  any  one  who  had  been 
spoken  to  by  the  other  leaders,  who  had  with 
held  his  assent."  And  the  conspirators  seem 
to  have  been  perfectly  satisfied  that  all  the 
remaining  slaves  would  enter  their  ranks  upon 
the  slightest  success.  "Let  us  assemble  a 
sufficient  number  to  commence  the  work  with 
spirit,  and  we'll  not  want  men ;  they'll  fall  in 
behind  us  fast  enough."  And  as  an  illustration 
of  this  readiness,  the  official  report  mentions 
a  slave  who  had  belonged  to  one  master  for 
sixteen  years,  sustaining  a  high  character  for 
fidelity  and  affection,  who  had  twice  travelled 
with  him  through  the  Northern  States,  resisting 
every  solicitation  to  escape,  and  who  yet  was 
very  deeply  concerned  in  the  insurrection, 
though  knowing  it  to  involve  the  probable 
destruction  of  the  whole  family  with  whom  he 
lived. 

One  singular  circumstance  followed  the  first 
rumors  of  the  plot.  Several  white  men,  said  to 
be  of  low  and  unprincipled  character,  at  once 
began  to  make  interest  with  the  supposed 
leaders  among  the  slaves,  either  from  genuine 


DENMARK   VESEY  249 

sympathy,  or  with  the  intention  of  betraying 
them  for  money,  or  by  profiting  by  the  insurrec 
tion,  should  it  succeed.  Four  of  these  were 
brought  to  trial ;  but  the  official  report  ex 
presses  the  opinion  that  many  more  might  have 
been  discovered  but  for  the  inadmissibility  of 
slave  testimony  against  whites.  Indeed,  the 
evidence  against  even  these  four  was  insufficient 
for  a  capital  conviction,  although  one  was  over 
heard,  through  stratagem,  by  the  intendant 
himself,  and  arrested  on  the  spot.  This  man 
was  a  Scotchman,  another  a  Spaniard,  a  third  a 
German,  and  the  fourth  a  Carolinian.  The  last 
had  for  thirty  years  kept  a  shop  in  the  neigh 
borhood  of  Charleston ;  he  was  proved  to  have 
asserted  that  "the  negroes  had  as  much  right 
to  fight  for  their  liberty  as  the  white  people," 
had  offered  to  head  them  in  the  enterprise,  and 
had  said  that  in  three  weeks  he  would  have 
two  thousand  men.  But  in  no  case,  it  appears, 
did  these  men  obtain  the  confidence  of  the 
slaves;  and  the  whole  plot  was  conceived  and 
organized,  so  far  as  appears,  without  the 
slightest  co-operation  from  any  white  man. 


250  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

The  trial  of  the  conspirators  began  on 
Wednesday,  June  19.  At  the  request  of  the 
intendant,  Justices  Kennedy  and  Parker  sum 
moned  five  freeholders  (Messrs.  Drayton, 
Heyward,  Pringle,  Legare*,  and  Turnbull)  to 
constitute  a  court,  under  the  provisions  of  the 
Act  "for  the  better  ordering  and  governing 
negroes  and  other  slaves."  The  intendant  laid 
the  case  before  them,  with  a  list  of  prisoners 
and  witnesses.  By  a  vote  of  the  court,  all 
spectators  were  excluded,  except  the  owners 
and  counsel  of  the  slaves  concerned.  No  other 
colored  person  was  allowed  to  enter  the  jail, 
and  a  strong  guard  of  soldiers  was  kept  always 
on  duty  around  the  building.  Under  these 
general  arrangements  the  trials  proceeded  with 
elaborate  formality,  though  with  some  variations 
from  ordinary  usage,  —  as  was,  indeed,  required 
by  the  statute. 

For  instance,  the  law  provided  that  the 
testimony  of  any  Indian  or  slave  could  be 
received,  without  oath,  against  a  slave  or  free 
colored  person,  although  it  was  not  valid,  even 
under  oath,  against  a  white.  But  it  is  best  to 


DENMARK  VESEY  251 

quote  the  official  language  in  respect  to  the 
rules  adopted :  "  As  the  court  had  been  organ 
ized  under  a  statute  of  a  peculiar  and  local 
character,  and  intended  for  the  government  of 
a  distinct  class  of  persons  in  the  community, 
they  were  bound  to  conform  their  proceedings 
to  its  provisions,  which  depart  in  many  essential 
features  from  the  principles  of  the  common 
law  and  some  of  the  settled  rules  of  evidence. 
The  court,  however,  determined  to  adopt  those 
rules,  whenever  they  were  not  repugnant  to  nor 
expressly  excepted  by  that  statute,  nor  incon 
sistent  with  the  local  situation  and  policy  of  the 
State  ;  and  laid  down  for  their  own  government 
the  following  regulations :  First,  that  no  slave 
should  be  tried  except  in  the  presence  of  his 
owner  or  his  counsel,  and  that  notice  should  be 
given  in  every  case  at  least  one  day  before  the 
trial ;  second,  that  the  testimony  of  one  witness, 
unsupported  by  additional  evidence  or  by  cir 
cumstances,  should  lead  to  no  conviction  of  a 
capital  nature  ;  third,  that  the  witnesses  should 
be  confronted  with  the  accused  and  with  each 
other  in  every  case,  except  where  testimony 


252  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

was  given  under  a  solemn  pledge  that  the 
mimes  of  the  witnesses  should  not  be  divulged, 
—  as  they  declared,  in  some  instances,  that  they 
apprehended  being  murdered  by  the  blacks,  if 
it  was  known  that  they  had  volunteered  their 
evidence;  fourth,  that  the  prisoners  might  be 
represented  by  counsel,  whenever  this  was 
requested  by  the  owners  of  the  slaves,  or  by 
the  prisoners  themselves  if  free ;  fifth,  that  the 
statements  or  defences  of  the  accused  should 
be  heard  in  every  case,  and  they  be  permitted 
themselves  to  examine  any  witness  they  thought 
proper." 

It  is  singular  to  observe  how  entirely  these 
rules  seem  to  concede  that  a  slave's  life  has  no 
sort  of  value  to  himself,  but  only  to  his  master. 
His  master,  not  he  himself,  must  choose  whether 
it  be  worth  while  to  employ  counsel.  His 
master,  not  his  mother  or  his  wife,  must  be 
present  at  the  trial.  So  far  is  this  carried,  that 
the  provision  to  exclude  "  persons  who  had  no 
particular  interest  in  the  slaves  accused  "  seems 
to  have  excluded  every  acknowledged  relative 
they  had  in  the  world,  and  admitted  only  those 


DENMARK   VESEY  253 

who  had  invested  in  them  so  many  dollars. 
And  yet  the  very  first  section  of  that  part  of 
the  statute  under  which  they  were  tried  lays 
down  an  explicit  recognition  of  their  human 
ity:  "  And  whereas  natural  justice  forbids  that 
any  person,  of  what  condition  soever,  should  be 
condemned  unheard."  So  thoroughly,  in  the 
whole  report,  are  the  ideas  of  person  and 
chattel  intermingled,  that  when  Gov.  Bennett 
petitions  for  mitigation  of  sentence  in  the  case 
of  his  slave  Batteau,  and  closes,  "I  ask  this, 
gentlemen,  as  an  individual  incurring  a  severe 
and  distressing  loss,"  it  is  really  impossible  to 
decide  whether 'the  predominant  emotion  be 
affectional  or  financial. 

It  is  a  matter  of  painful  necessity  to  ac 
knowledge  that  the  proceedings  of  most  slave- 
tribunals  have  justified  the  honest  admission  of 
Gov.  Adams  of  South  Carolina,  in  his  legisla 
tive  message  of  1855:  "The  administration 
of  our  laws,  in  relation  to  our  colored  popula 
tion,  by  our  courts  of  magistrates  and  freehold 
ers,  as  these  courts  are  at  present  constituted, 
calls  loudly  for  reform.  Their  decisions  are 


254  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

rarely  in  conformity  with  justice  or  humanity." 
This  trial,  as  reported  by  the  justices  them 
selves,  seems  to  have  been  no  worse  than  the 
average,  —  perhaps  better.  In  all,  thirty-five 
were  sentenced  to  death,  thirty-four  to  trans 
portation,  twenty-seven  acquitted  by  the  court, 
and  twenty-five  discharged  without  trial,  by  the 
Committee  of  Vigilance,  —  making  in  all  one 
hundred  and  twenty-one. 

The  sentences  pronounced  by  Judge  Ken 
nedy  upon  the  leading  rebels,  while  paying  a 
high  tribute  to  their  previous  character,  of 
course  bring  all  law  and  all  Scripture  to  prove 
the  magnitude  of  their  crime.  "  It  is  a  melan 
choly  fact,"  he  says,  "that  those  servants  in 
whom  we  reposed  the  most  unlimited  confi 
dence  have  been  the  principal  actors  in  this 
wicked  scheme."  Then  he  rises  into  earnest 
appeals.  "  Are  you  incapable  of  the  heavenly 
influence  of  that  gospel,  all  whose  paths  are 
peace?  It  was  to  reconcile  us  to  our  destiny 
on  earth,  and  to  enable  us  to  discharge  with 
fidelity  all  our  duties,  whether  as  master  or 
servant,  that  those  inspired  precepts  were  im 
parted  by  Heaven  to  fallen  man." 


DENMARK   VESEY  255 

To  these  reasonings  the  prisoners  had,  of 
course,  nothing  to  say ;  but  the  official  reports 
bear  the  strongest  testimony  to  their  fortitude. 
"  Rolla,  when  arraigned,  affected  not  to  under 
stand  the  charge  against  him,  and,  when  it  was 
at  his  request  further  explained  to  him,  assumed, 
with  wonderful  adroitness,  astonishment  and 
surprise.  He  was  remarkable,  throughout  his 
trial,  for  great  presence  and  composure  of  mind. 
When  he  was  informed  he  was  convicted,  and 
was  advised  to  prepare  for  death,  though  he 
had  previously  (but  after  his  trial)  confessed 
his  guilt,  he  appeared  perfectly  confounded, 
but  exhibited  no  signs  of  fear.  In  Ned's  be 
havior  there  was  nothing  remarkable ;  but  his 
countenance  was  stern  and  immovable,  even 
whilst  he  was  receiving  the  sentence  of  death : 
from  his  looks  it  was  impossible  to  discover  or 
conjecture  what  were  his  feelings.  Not  so  with 
Peter:  for  in  his  countenance  were  strongly 
marked  disappointed  ambition,  revenge,  indig 
nation,  and  an  anxiety  to  know  how  far  the 
discoveries  had  extended ;  and  the  same  emo 
tions  were  exhibited  in  his  conduct.  He  did 


256  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

not  appear  to  fear  personal  consequences,  for 
his  whole  behavior  indicated  the  reverse ;  but 
exhibited  an  evident  anxiety  for  the  success 
of  their  plan,  in  which  his  whole  soul  was 
embarked.  His  countenance  and  behavior  were 
the  same  when  he  received  his  sentence  ;  and 
his  only  words  were,  on  retiring,  4I  suppose 
you'll  let  me  see  my  wife  and  family  before 
I  die?'  and  that  not  in  a  supplicating  tone. 
When  he  was  asked,  a  day  or  two  after,  if  it 
was  possible  he  could  wish  to  see  his  master 
and  family  murdered,  who  had  treated  him  so 
kindly,  he  only  replied  to  the  question  by  a 
smile.  Monday's  behavior  was  not  peculiar. 
When  he  was  before  the  court,  his  arms  were 
folded;  he  heard  the  testimony  given  against 
him,  and  received  his  sentence,  with  the  utmost 
firmness  and  composure.  But  no  description 
can  accurately  convey  to  others  the  impression 
which  the  trial,  defence,  and  appearance  of 
Gullah  Jack  made  on  those  who  witnessed  the 
workings  of  his  cunning  and  rude  address. 
When  arrested  and  brought  before  the  court, 
in  company  with  another  African  named  Jack, 


DENMARK   VESEY  257 

the  property  of  the  estate  of  Prit chard,  he 
assumed  so  much  ignorance,  and  looked  and 
acted  the  fool  so  well,  that  some  of  the  court 
could  not  believe  that  this  was  the  necromancer 
who  was  sought  after.  This  conduct  he  con 
tinued  when  on  his  trial,  until  he  saw  the  wit 
nesses  and  heard  the  testimony  as  it  progressed 
against  him  ;  when,  in  an  instant,  his  counte 
nance  was  lighted  up  as  if  by  lightning,  and 
his  wildness  and  vehemence  of  gesture,  and  the 
malignant  glance  with  which  he  eyed  the  wit 
nesses  who  appeared  against  him,  all  indicated 
the  savage,  who  indeed  had  been  caught,  but 
not  tamed.  His  courage,  however,  soon  forsook 
him.  When  he  received  sentence  of  death, 
he  earnestly  implored  that  a  fortnight  longer 
might  be  allowed  him,  and  then  a  week  longer, 
which  he  continued  earnestly  to  solicit  until 
he  was  taken  from  the  court-room  to  his  cell ; 
and  when  he  was  carried  to  execution,  he  gave 
up  his  spirit  without  firmness  or  composure." 
Not  so  with  Denmark  Vesey.  The  plans  of 
years  were  frustrated ;  his  own  life  and  liberty 
were  thrown  away ;  many  others  were  sacri- 


258  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

ficed  through  his  leadership ;  and  one  more  was 
added  to  the  list  of  unsuccessful  insurrections. 
All  these  disastrous  certainties  he  faced  calmly, 
and  gave  his  whole  mind  composedly  to  the 
conducting  of  his  defence.  With  his  arms 
tightly  folded,  and  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  floor, 
he  attentively  followed  every  item  of  the  testi 
mony.  He  heard  the  witnesses  examined  by 
the  court,  and  cross-examined  by  his  own 
counsel ;  and  it  is  evident  from  the  narrative  of 
the  presiding  judge,  that  he  showed  no  small 
skill  and  policy  in  the  searching  cross-examina 
tion  which  he  then  applied.  The  fears,  the 
feelings,  the  consciences,  of  those  who  had  be 
trayed  him,  all  were  in  turn  appealed  to ;  but 
the  facts  were  quite  overpowering,  and  it  was 
too  late  to  aid  his  comrades  or  himself.  Then 
turning  to  the  court,  he  skilfully  availed  him 
self  of  the  point  which  had  so  much  impressed 
the  community  :  the  intrinsic  improbability  that 
a  man  in  his  position  of  freedom  and  prosperity 
should  sacrifice  every  thing  to  free  other  people. 
If  they  thought  it  so  incredible,  why  not  give 
him  the  benefit  of  the  incredibility?  The  act 


DENMARK  VESEY  259 

being,  as  they  stated,  one  of  infatuation,  why 
convict  him  of  it  on  the  bare  word  of  men 
who,  by  their  own  showing,  had  not  only  shared 
the  infatuation,  but  proved  traitors  to  it?  An 
ingenious  defence,  —  indeed,  the  only  one  which 
could  by  any  possibility  be  suggested,  anterior 
to  the  days  of  Choate  and  somnambulism ;  but 
in  vain.  He  was  sentenced;  and  it  was  not, 
apparently,  till  the  judge  reproached  him  for 
the  destruction  he  had  brought  on  his  followers, 
that  he  showed  any  sign  of  emotion.  Then 
the  tears  came  into  his  eyes.  But  he  said  not 
another  word. 

m 

The  executions  took  place  on  five  different 
days ;  and,  bad  as  they  were,  they  might  have 
been  worse.  After  the  imaginary  Negro  Plot 
of  New  York,  in  1741,  thirteen  negroes  had 
been  judicially  burned  alive ;  two  had  suffered 
the  same  sentence  at  Charleston  in  1808 ;  and  it 
was  undoubtedly  some  mark  of  progress,  that 
in  this  case  the  gallows  took  the  place  of  the 
flames.  Six  were  hanged  on  July  2,  upon 
Blake's  lands,  near  Charleston,  —  Denmark 
Vesey,  Peter  Poyas,  Jesse,  Ned,  Rolla,  and 


260  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

Batteau,  —  the  last  three  being  slaves  of  the 
governor  himself.  Gullah  Jack  and  John  were 
executed  "on  the  Lines,"  near  Charleston,  on 
July  12;  and  twenty-two  more  on  July  26. 
Four  others  suffered  their  fate  on  July  30 ;  and 
one  more,  William  Garner,  effected  a  tempo 
rary  escape,  was  captured,  and  tried  by  a  dif 
ferent  court,  and  was  finally  executed  on 
Aug.  9. 

The  self-control  of  these  men  did  not  desert 
them  at  their  execution.  When  the  six  leaders 
suffered  death,  the  report  says,  Peter  Poyas 
repeated  his  charge  of  secrecy :  "  Do  not  open 
your  lips ;  die  silent,  as  you  shall  see  me  do ; " 
and  all  obeyed.  And  though  afterwards,  as 
the  particulars  of  the  plot  became  better  known, 
there  was  less  inducement  to  conceal,  yet  every 
one  of  the  thirty-five  seems  to  have  met  his 
fate  bravely,  except  the  conjurer.  Gov.  Ben 
nett,  in  his  letter,  expresses  much  dissatisfac 
tion  at  the  small  amount  learned  from  the 
participators.  "  To  the  last  hour  of  the  exist 
ence  of  several  who  appeared  to  be  conspicuous 
actors  in  the  drama,  they  were  pressingly  im- 


DENMARK   VESEY  261 

portuned  to  make  further  confessions,"  —  this 
"importuning"  being  more  clearly  defined  in 
a  letter  of  Mr.  Ferguson,  owner  of  two  of  the 
slaves,  as  "having  them  severely  corrected." 
Yet  so  little  was  obtained,  that  the  governor 
was  compelled  to  admit  at  last  that  the  really 
essential  features  of  the  plot  were  not  known 
to  any  of  the  informers. 

It  is  to  be  remembered,  that  the  plot  failed 
because  a  man  unauthorized  and  incompetent, 
William  Paul,  undertook  to  make  enlistments 
on  his  own  account.  He  happened  on  one  of 
precisely  that  class  of  men,  —  favored  house- 
servants,  —  whom  his  leaders  had  expressly 
reserved  for  more  skilful  manipulations.  He 
being  thus  detected,  one  would  have  supposed 
that  the  discovery  of  many  accomplices  would 
at  once  have  followed.  The  number  enlisted 
was  counted  by  thousands ;  yet  for  twenty-nine 
days  after  the  first  treachery,  and  during  twenty 
days  of  official  examination,  only  fifteen  of  the 
conspirators  were  ferreted  out.  Meanwhile  the 
informers'  names  had  to  be  concealed  with 
the  utmost  secrecy ;  they  were  in  peril  of 


262  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

their  lives  from  the  slaves,  —  William  Paul 
scarcely  dared  to  go  beyond  the  doorstep, — 
and  the  names  of  important  witnesses  examined 
in  June  were  still  suppressed  in  the  official 
report  published  in  October.  That  a  conspir 
acy  on  so  large  a  scale  should  have  existed  in 
embryo  during  four  years,  and  in  an  active 
form  for  several  months,  and  yet  have  been  so 
well  managed,  that,  after  actual  betrayal,  the 
authorities  were  again  thrown  off  their  guard, 
and  the  plot  nearly  brought  to  a  head  again,  — 
this  certainly  shows  extraordinary  ability  in 
the  leaders,  and  a  talent  for  concerted  action 
on  the  part  of  slaves  generally,  with  which  they 
have  hardly  been  credited. 

And  it  is  also  to  be  noted,  that  the  range  of 
the  conspiracy  extended  far  beyond  Charleston. 
It  was  proved  that  Frank,  slave  of  Mr.  Fergu 
son,  living  nearly  forty  miles  from  the  city,  had 
boasted  of  having  enlisted  four  plantations  in 
his  immediate  neighborhood.  It  was  in  evi 
dence  that  the  insurgents  "  were  trying  all 
round  the  country,  from  Georgetown  and  San- 
tee  round  about  to  Combahee,  to  get  people  ; " 


DENMARK  VESEY  263 

and,  after  the  trials,  it  was  satisfactorily  estab 
lished  that  Vesey  "  had  been  in  the  country  as 
far  north  as  South  Santee,  and  southwardly 
as  far  as  the  Euhaws,  which  is  between  seventy 
and  eighty  miles  from  the  city."  Mr.  Ferguson 
himself  testified  that  the  good  order  of  any 
gang  was  no  evidence  of  their  ignorance  of  the 
plot,  since  the  behavior  of  his  own  initiated 
slaves  had  been  unexceptionable,  in  accordance 
with  Vesey's  directions. 

With  such  an  organization  and  such  mate 
rials,  there  was  nothing  in  the  plan  which 
could  be  pronounced  incredible  or  impractic 
able.  There  is  no  reason  why  they  should 
not  have  taken  the  city.  After  all  the  gov 
ernor's  entreaties  as  to  moderate  language,  the 
authorities  were  obliged  to  admit  that  South 
Carolina  had  been  saved  from  a  "  horrible 
catastrophe."  "  For,  although  success  could 
not  possibly  have  attended  the  conspirators, 
yet,  before  their  suppression,  Charleston  would 
probably  have  been  wrapped  in  flames,  many 
valuable  lives  would  have  been  sacrificed,  and 
an  immense  loss  of  property  sustained  by  the 


264  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

citizens,  even  though  no  other  distressing  occur 
rences  were  experienced  by  them ;  while  the 
plantations  in  the  lower  country  would  have 
been  disorganized,  and  the  agricultural  inter 
ests  have  sustained  an  enormous  loss."  The 
Northern  journals  had  already  expressed  still 
greater  anxieties.  "  It  appears,"  said  the  New- 
York  Commercial  Advertiser,  "  that,  but  for  the 
timely  disclosure,  the  whole  of  that  State  would 
in  a  few  days  have  witnessed  the  horrid  spec 
tacle  once  witnessed  in  St.  Domingo." 

My  friend,  David  Lee  Child,  has  kindly  com 
municated  to  me  a  few  memoranda  of  a  conver 
sation  held  long  since  with  a  free  colored  man 
who  had  worked  in  Vesey's  shop  during  the 
time  of  the  insurrection;  and  these  generally 
confirm  the  official  narratives.  "  I  was  a  young 
man  then,"  he  said  ;  "  and,  owing  to  the  pol 
icy  of  preventing  communication  between  free 
colored  people  and  slaves,  I  had  little  oppor 
tunity  of  ascertaining  how  the  slaves  felt  about 
it.  I  know  that  several  of  them  were  abused 
in  the  street,  and  some  put  in  prison,  for 
appearing  in  sackcloth.  There  was  an  ordi- 


DENMARK   VESEY  265 

nance  of  the  city,  that  any  slave  who  wore  a 
badge  of  mourning  should  be  imprisoned  and 
flogged.  They  generally  got  the  law,  which  is 
thirty-nine  lashes  ;  but  sometimes  it  was  accord 
ing  to  the  decision  of  the  court."  "  I  heard, 
at  the  time,  of  arms  being  buried  in  coffins  at 
Sullivan's  Island."  "  In  the  time  of  the  insur 
rection,  the  slaves  were  tried  in  a  small  room 
in  the  jail  where  they  were  confined.  No 
colored  person  was  allowed  to  go  within  two 
squares  of  the  prison.  Those  two  squares  were 
filled  with  troops,  five  thousand  of  whom  were 
on  duty  day  and  night.  I  was  told,  Vesey  said 
to  those  that  tried  him,  that  the  work  of  insur 
rection  would  go  on ;  but  as  none  but  white 
persons  were  permitted  to  be  present,  I  cannot 
tell  whether  he  said  it." 

During  all  this  time  there  was  naturally 
a  silence  in  the  Charleston  journals,  which 
strongly  contrasts  with  the  extreme  publicity 
at  last  given  to  the  testimony.  Even  the 
National  Intelligencer,  at  Washington,  passed 
lightly  over  the  affair,  and  deprecated  the  pub 
lication  of  particulars.  The  Northern  editors, 


266  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

on  the  other  hand,  eager  for  items,  were  con 
stantly  complaining  of  this  reserve,  and  call 
ing  for  further  intelligence.  "  The  Charleston 
papers,"  said  the  Hartford  Courant  of  July 
16,  "  have  been  silent  on  the  subject  of  the 
insurrection  ;  but  letters  from  this  city  state 
that  it  has  created  much  alarm,  and  that  two 
brigades  of  troops  were  under  arms  for  some 
time  to  suppress  any  risings  that  might  have 
taken  place."  "  You  will  doubtless  hear," 
wrote  a  Charleston  correspondent  of  the  same 
paper,  just  before,  "  many  reports,  and  some 
exaggerated  ones."  "  There  was  certainly  a 
disposition  to  revolt,  and  some  preparations 
made,  principally  by  the  plantation  negroes,  to 
take  the  city."  "We  hoped  they  would  pro 
gress  so  far  as  to  enable  us  to  ascertain  and 
punish  the  ringleaders."  "Assure  my  friends 
that  we  feel  in  perfect  security,  although  the 
number  of  nightly  guards,  and  other  demon 
strations,  may  induce  a  belief  among  strangers 
to  the  contrary." 

The  strangers  would  have  been  very  blind 
strangers,  if  they  had  not  been  more  influenced 


DENMARK   VESEY  267 

by  the  actions  of  the  Charleston  citizens  than 
by  their  words.  The  original  information  was 
given  on  May  25,  1822.  The  time  passed,  and 
the  plot  failed  011  June  16.  A  plan  for  its 
revival  on  July  2  proved  abortive.  Yet  a  letter 
from  Charleston,  in  the  Hartford  Courant  of 
Aug.  6,  represented  the  panic  as  unabated : 
"Great  preparations  are  making,  and  all  the 
military  are  put  in  preparation  to  guard 
against  any  attempt  of  the  same  kind  again  ; 
but  we  have  no  apprehension  of  its  being 
repeated."  On  Aug.  10,  Gov.  Bennett  wrote 
the  letter  already  mentioned,  which  was  printed 
and  distributed  as  a  circular,  its  object  being  to 
deprecate  undue  alarm.  "  Every  individual  in 
the  State  is  interested,  whether  in  regard  to  his 
own  property,  or  the  reputation  of  the  State, 
in  giving  no  more  importance  to  the  transac 
tion  than  it  justly  merits."  Yet,  five  days  after 
this,  —  two  months  after  the  first  danger  had 
passed,  —  a  re-enforcement  of  United -States 
troops  arrived  at  Fort  Moultrie ;  and,  during 
the  same  month,  several  different  attempts  were 
made  by  small  parties  of  armed  negroes  to  cap- 


268  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

ture  the  mails  between  Charleston  and  Savan 
nah,  and  a  reward  of  two  hundred  dollars  was 
offered  for  their  detection. 

The  first  official  report  of  the  trials  was  pre 
pared  by  the  intendant,  by  request  of  the  city 
council.  It  passed  through  four  editions  in  a 
few  months,  —  the  first  and  fourth  being  pub 
lished  in  Charleston,  and  the  second  and  third 
in  Boston.  Being,  however,  but  a  brief  pam 
phlet,  it  did  not  satisfy  the  public  curiosity ;  and 
in  October  of  the  same  year  (1822),  a  larger 
volume  appeared  at  Charleston,  edited  by  the 
magistrates  who  presided  at  the  trials,  —  Lionel 
H.  Kennedy  and  Thomas  Parker.  It  contains 
the  evidence  in  full,  and  a  separate  narrative 
of  the  whole  affair,  more  candid  and  lucid  than 
any  other  which  I  have  found  in  the  newspapers 
or  pamphlets  of  the  day.  It  exhibits  that  rarest 
of  all  qualities  in  a  slave-community,  a  willing 
ness  to  look  facts  in  the  face.  This  narrative 
has. been  faithfully  followed,  with  the  aid  of 
such  cross-lights  as  could  be  secured  from  many 
other  quarters,  in  preparing  the  present  history. 

The  editor  of  the  first  official  report  racked 


DENMARK   VESEY  269 

his  brains  to  discover  the  special  causes  of  the 
revolt,  and  never  trusted  himself  to  allude  to 
the  general  one.  The  negroes  rebelled  because 
they  were  deluded  by  Congressional  eloquence ; 
or  because  they  were  excited  by  a  church  squab 
ble  ;  or  because  they  had  been  spoilt  by  mis 
taken  indulgences,  such  as  being  allowed  to 
learn  to  read,  —  "  a  misguided  benevolence," 
as  he  pronounces  it.  So  the  Baptist  Conven 
tion  seems  to  have  thought  it  was  because 
they  were  not  Baptists ;  and  an  Episcopal  pam 
phleteer,  because  they  were  not  Episcopalians. 
It  never  seems  to  occur  to  any  of  these  specta 
tors,  that  these  people  rebelled  simply  because 
they  were  slaves,  and  wished  to  be  free. 

No  doubt,  there  were  enough  special  torches 
with  which  a  man  so  skilful  as  Denmark  Vesey 
could  kindle  up  these  dusky  powder-magazines ; 
but,  after  all,  the  permanent  peril  lay  in  the 
powder.  So  long  as  that  existed,  every  thing 
was  incendiary.  Any  torn  scrap  in  the  street 
might  contain  a  Missouri-Compromise  speech, 
or  a  report  of  the  last  battle  in  St.  Domingo, 
or  one  of  those  able  letters  of  Boyer's  which 


270  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

were  winning  the  praise  of  all,  or  one  of  John 
Randolph's  stirring  speeches  in  England  against 
the  slave-trade.  The  very  newspapers  which 
reported  the  happy  extinction  of  the  insurrec 
tion  by  the  hanging  of  the  last  conspirator, 
William  Garner,  reported  also,  with  enthusi 
astic  indignation,  the  massacre  of  the  Greeks 
at  Constantinople  and  at  Scio  ;  and  then  the 
Northern  editors,  breaking  from  their  usual 
reticence,  pointed  out  the  inconsistency  of 
Southern  journals  in  printing,  side  by  side, 
denunciations  of  Mohammedan  slave-sales,  £nd 
advertisements  of  those  of  Christians. 

Of  course  ,the  insurrection  threw  the  whole 
slavery  question  open  to  the  public.  "  We  are 
sorry  to  see,"  said  the  National  Intelligencer 
of  Aug.  31,  "that  a  discussion  of  the  hateful 
Missouri  question  is  likely  to  be  revived,  in 
consequence  of  the  allusions  to  its  supposed 
effect  in  producing  the  late  servile  insurrection 
in  South  Carolina."  A  member  of  the  Board 
of  Public  Works  of  South  Carolina  published 
in  the  Baltimore  American  Farmer  an  essay 
urging  the  encouragement  of  white  laborers. 


DENMARK  VESEY  271 

and  hinting  at  the  ultimate  abolition  of  slavery 
"  if  it  should  ever  be  thought  desirable."  More 
boldly  still,  a  pamphlet  appeared  in  Charleston, 
under  the  signature  of  "  Achates,"  arguing  with 
remarkable  sagacity  and  force  against  the  whole 
system  of  slave-labor  in  towns;  and  proposing 
that  all  slaves  in  Charleston  should  be  sold  or 
transferred  to  the  plantations,  and  their  places 
supplied  by  white  labor.  It  is  interesting  to 
find  many  of  the  facts  and  arguments  of  Help 
er's  "  Impending  Crisis "  anticipated  in  this 
courageous  tract,  written  under  the  pressure 
of  a  crisis  which  had  just  been  so  narrowly 
evaded.  The  author  is  described  in  the  preface 
as  "a  soldier  and  patriot  of  the  Revolution, 
whose  name,  did  we  feel  ourselves  at  liberty  to 
use  it,  would  stamp  a  peculiar  weight  and  value 
on  his  opinions."  It  was  commonly  attributed 
to  Gen.  Thomas  Pinckney. 

Another  pamphlet  of  the  period,  also  pub 
lished  in  Charleston,  recommended  as  a  practical 
cure  for  insurrection  the  copious  administration 
of  Episcopal-Church  services,  and  the  prohibi 
tion  of  negroes  from  attending  Fourth-of-July 


272  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

celebrations.  On  this  last  point  it  is  more  con 
sistent  than  most  pro-slavery  arguments.  "  The 
celebration  of  the  Fourth  of  July  belongs  exclu 
sively  to  the  white  population  of  the  United 
States.  The  American  Revolution  was  a  family 
quarrel  among  equals.  In  this  the  negroes  had 
no  concern ;  their  condition  remained,  and 
must  remain,  unchanged.  They  have  no  more 
to  do  with  the  celebration  of  that  day  than 
with  the  landing  of  the  Pilgrims  on  the  rock 
at  Plymouth.  It  therefore  seems  to  me  im 
proper  to  allow  these  people  to  be  present  on 
these  occasions.  In  our  speeches  and  orations, 
much,  and  sometimes  more  than  is  politically 
necessary,  is  said  about  personal  liberty,  which 
negro  auditors  know  not  how  to  apply  except 
by  running  the  parallel  with  their  own  condi 
tion.  They  therefore  imbibe  false  notions  of 
their  own  personal  rights,  and  give  reality  in 
their  minds  to  what  has  no  real  existence.  The 
peculiar  state  of  our  community  must  be  stead 
ily  kept  in  view.  This,  I  am  gratified  to  learn, 
will  in  some  measure  be  promoted  by  the  insti 
tution  of  the  South  Carolina  Association." 


DENMARK   VESEY  273 

On  the  other  hand,  more  stringent  laws 
became  obviously  necessary  to  keep  down  the 
advancing  intelligence  of  the  Charleston  slaves. 
Dangerous  knowledge  must  be  excluded  from 
without  and  from  within.  For  the  first  purpose 
the  South  Carolina  Legislature  passed,  in  De 
cember,  1822,  the  Act  for  the  imprisonment  of 
Northern  colored  seamen,  which  afterwards 
produced  so  much  excitement.  For  the  second 
object,  the  Grand  Jury,  about  the  same  time, 
presented  as  a  grievance  "  the  number  of 
schools  which  are  kept  within  the  city  by  per 
sons  of  color,"  and  proposed  their  prohibition. 
This  was  the  encouragement  given  to  the  intel 
lectual  progress  of  the  slaves ;  while,  as  a 
reward  for  betraying  them,  Pensil,  the  free 
colored  man  who  advised  with  Devany,  received 
a  present  of  one  thousand  dollars ;  and  Devany 
himself  had  what  was  rightly  judged  to  be  the 
higher  gift  of  freedom,  and  was  established  in 
business,  with  liberal  means,  as  a  drayman.  He 
lived  long  in  Charleston,  thriving  greatly  in  his 
vocation,  and,  according  to  the  newspapers, 
enjoyed  the  privilege  of  being  the  only  man 


274  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

of  property  in  the  State  whom  a  special  statute 
exempted  from  taxation. 

More  than  half  a  century  has  passed  since 
the  incidents  of  this  true  story  closed.  It  has 
not  vanished  from  the  memories  of  South  Caro 
linians,  though  the  printed  pages  which  once 
told  it  have  gradually  disappeared  from  sight. 
The  intense  avidity  which  at  first  grasped  at 
every  incident  of  the  great  insurrectionary 
plot  was  succeeded  by  a  prolonged  distaste  for 
the  memory  of  the  tale ;  and  the  official  reports 
which  told  what  slaves  had  once  planned  and 
dared  have  now  come  to  be  among  the  rarest  of 
American  historical  documents.  In  1841,  a 
friend  of  the  writer,  then  visiting  South  Caro 
lina,  heard  from  her  hostess,  for  the  first  time, 
the  events  which  are  recounted  here.  On 
asking  to  see  the  reports  of  the  trials,  she  was 
cautiously  told  that  the  only  copy  in  the  house, 
after  being  carefully  kept  for  years  under  lock 
and  key,  had  been  burnt  at  last,  lest  it  should 
reach  the  dangerous  eyes  of  the  slaves.  The 
same  thing  had  happened,  it  was  added,  in  many 
other  families.  This  partially  accounts  for  the 


DENMARK  VESEY  275 

great  difficulty  now  to  be  found  in  obtaining  a 
single  copy  of  either  publication  ;  and  this  is 
why,  to  the  readers  of  American  history,  Den 
mark  Vesey  and  Peter  Poyas  have  commonly 
been  but  the  shadows  of  names. 