L EA V E S FROM AN O F F IC E R ’S JO U RN A L .
II.
Camp Saxton-, near Beaufort, S. C.
December 11, 1802.
Hahoun Alraschid, wandering in
disguise through his imperial streets,
scarcely happened upon a greater variety
of groups than I, in my evening
strolls among our own camp-fires.
Beside some of these fires, the men
are cleaning their guns or rehearsing
their drill, — beside others, smoking in
silence their very scanty supply of the
beloved tobacco, •— beside others, telling
stories and shouting with*laughter over
the broadest mimicry, in which they
excel, and in which the officers come
in for a full share. The everlasting
“ shout” is always within hearing, with
its mixture of piety and polka, and its
castanet - like clapping of the hands.
Then there are quieter prayer-meetings,
with pious invocations, and slow psalms,
“ deaconed out ” from memory by the
leader, two lines at a time, in a sort
of wailing chant. Elsewhere, there are
conversazioni around fires, with a woman
for queen of the circle, — her Nubian
face, gay head - dress, gilt necklace, and
white teeth, all resplendent in the glowing
light. Sometimes the woman is
spelling slow monosyllables out of a
primer, a feat which always commands
all ears, — they rightly recognizing a
mighty spell, equal to the overthrowing
of monarchs, in the magic assonance of
cat, hat, pat, bat, and the rest of it. Elsewhere,
it is some solitary old cook, some
aged Uncle Till', with enormous spectacles,
who is perusing a hymn-book by
the light of a pine splinter, in his deserted
cooking-booth of palmetto-leaves.
By another fire there is an actual dance,
red-legged soldiers doing right-and-left,
and “ now -lead- de - lady- ober,” to the
music of a violin which is rather artistically
played, and which may have
guided the steps, in other days, of Barnwells
and Hugers. And yonder is a
stump-orator perched on his barrel, pouring
out his exhortations to fidelity in
war and in religion. To-night for the
first time I have heard an harangue in
a different strain, quite sauey, skeptical,
and defiant, appealing to them in a sort
of French materialistic style, and claiming
some personal experience of warfare.
“ You don’t know notin’ about it, boys.
You tink you’s brave enough ; how you
tink, if you stan’ clar in de open field,
— here you, an’ dar de Seeesh ? You’s
got to hab de right ting inside o’ you.
1864.] Leaves from an 741
You must hab it ’served [preserved]
in you, like dese yer sour plums dey
’serve in de barr’l ; you ’s got to harden
it down inside o’ you, or it ’s notin’.”
Then he hit hard at the religionists
: — “ When a m a n ’s got de sperit
ob de Lord in him, it weakens him
all out, can’t hoe de corn.” He had a
great deal of broad sense in his speech;
but presently some others began praying
vociferously close by, as if to drown
this free-thinker, when at last he exclaimed,
“ I mean to fight de war through,
an’ die a good sojer wid de last kick, —•
d a t’s my prayer 1 ” and suddenly jumped
otf the barrel. I was quite interested
at discovering this reverse side of the
temperament, the devotional side preponderates
so enormously, and the greatest
scamps kneel and groan in their prayermeetings
with such entire zest. It shows
that there is some individuality developed
among them, and that they will not
become too exclusively pietistic.
Their love of the spelling-book is
perfectly inexhaustible,—they stumbling
on by themselves, or the blind leading
the blind, with the same pathetic patience
which they carry into everything.
The chaplain is getting up a schoolhouse,
where he will soon teach them
as regularly as he can. But the alphabet
must always be a very incidental
business in a camp.
December 14.
Passages from prayers in the camp: —
“ Let me so lib dat when I die I shall
hab manners, dat I shall know what to
say when I see mv Heabenly Lord.”
“ Let me lib wid de musket in one
hand, an’ de Bible in de oder, — dat
if I die at do muzzle ob de musket, die
in de water, die on de land, I may
know I hab de bressed Jesus in unhand,
an’ hab no fear.”
“ I hab lef’ my wife in de land o’
bondage; my little ones dey sav eb’ry
night, YVTiar is my fader ? But when
I die, when de bressed mornin’ rises,
when I shall stall’ in de glory, wid one
foot on de water an’ one foot on de
Officer's Journal.
land, den, O Lord, I shall see my wife
an’ my little cliil’en once more.”
These sentences I noted down, as best
I could, beside the glimmering camp-fire
last night. The same person was the
hero of a singular little contre-temps at a
funeral in the afternoon. I t was our
first funeral. The man had died in hospital,
and we had chosen a picturesque
burial - place above the river, near the
old church, and beside a little nameless
cemetery, used by generations of slaves.
It w-as a regular military- funeral, the
coffin being draped with the American
flag, the escort marching behind, and
three volleys fired over the grave. During
the services there was singing, the
chaplain deaconing out the hymn in their
favorite wav. This ended, he announced
his text, — “ This poor man cried, and
the Lord heard him, and delivered him
out of all his trouble.” Instantly, to my
great amazement, the cracked voice of
•the chorister was uplifted, intoning the
text, as if it were the first verse of another
hymn. So calmly- was it done, so imperturbable
were all the black countenances,
that I half began to conjecture
that the chaplain himself intended it for
a hymn, though I could imagine no prospective
rhyme for trouble, unless it were
approximated by debbil, ■— which is, indeed,
a favorite reference, both with the
men and with his Reverence. But the
chaplain, peacefully awaiting, gently- repeated
his text after the chant, and to
my- great relief the old chorister waived
all further recitative and let the funeral
discourse proceed.
Their memories are a vast bewildered
chaos of Jewish history and biography;
and most of the great events of the. past,
down to the period of the American Revolution,
they instinctively attribute to Moses.
There is a fine bold confidence in
all their citations, however, and the record
never loses piquancy in their hands,
though strict accuracy- may suffer. Thus,
one of my captains, last Sunday, heard
a colored exhorter at Beaufort proclaim,
“ Paul may plant, and may polish wid
water, but it won’t do,” in which the
742
sainted Apollos would hardly have recognized
himself.
Just now one of the soldiers came to
me to say that he was about to be married
to a girl in Beaufort, and would I
lend him a dollar and seventy-five cents
to buy the wedding outfit ? It seemed
as if matrimony on such moderate terms
ought to be encouraged, in these days;
and so I responded to the appeal.
December 16.
To-day a young recruit appeared here,
who had been the slave of Colonel Sammis,
one of the leading Florida refugees.
Two white companions came with him,
who also appeared to be retainers of the
Colonel, and I asked them to dine. Being
likewise refugees, they had stories
to tell, and were quite agreeable: one
was English-born, the other Floridian, a
dark, sallow Southerner, very well-bred.
After they had gone, the Colonel himself
appeared. I told him that I had
been entertaining his white friends, and
after a while he quietly let out the remark,
—
“ Yes, one of those white friends of
whom you speak is a boy raised on one
of my plantations ; he has travelled with
me to the North and passed for white,
and he always keeps away from the negroes.”
Certainly no such suspicion had ever
crossed my mind.
I have noticed one man in the regiment
who would easily pass for white,
— a little sickly drummer, aged fifty at
least, with brown eyes and reddish hair,
who is said to be the son of one of our
commodores. I have seen perhaps a
dozen persons as fair or fairer, among
fugitive slaves, but they were usually
young children. It touched me far more
to see this man, who had spent more than
half a lifetime in this low estate, and for
whom it now seemed too late to be anything
but a “ nigger.” This offensive
word, by the way, is almost as common
with them as at the North, and far
more common than with well-bred slave-
[ December,
holders. They have meekly accepted
it. “ Want to go out to ile nigger-houses,
Sail,” is the universal impulse of sociability,
when they wish to cross the lines.
“ He liab twenty house - servants, an’
two hundred head o’ nigger,” is a still
more degrading form of phrase, in which
the epithet is limited to the field-hands,
and they estimated like so many cattle.
This want of self-respect of course interferes
with the authority of the noncommissioned
officers, which is always
difficult to sustain, even in white regiments.
“ He need n’t try to play de
white man ober me,” was the protest
of a soldier against his corporal the other
day. To counteract this, I have often to
remind them that they do not obey their
officers because they are white, but because
they are their officers; and guardduty
is an admirable school for this, because
they readily understand that the
sergeant or corporal of the guard has for
the time more authority than any commissioned
officer who is not on duty. It is
necessary also for their superiors to treat
the non-commissioned officers with careful
courtesy, and I often caution the lineofficers
never to call them “ Sam ” or
“ Will,” nor omit the proper handle to
their names. The value of the habitual
courtesies of the regular army is exceedingly
apparent with these men : an officer
of polished manners can wind them round
his finger, while white soldiers seem rather
to prefer a certain roughness. The
demeanor of my men to each other is
very courteous, and yet I see none of
that sort of upstart conceit which is
sometimes offensive among free negroes
at the North, the dandy - barber strut,
This is an agreeable surprise, for I feared
that freedom and regimentals would
produce precisely that.
They seem the world’s perpetual children,
docile, gay, and lovable, in the
midst of this war for freedom on which
they have intelligently entered. Last
night, before “ taps,” there was the
greatest noise in camp that I had ever
heard, and I feared some riot. On going
out, I found the most tumultuous
Leaves from an Officer's Journal.
1864.] Leaves from an 743
sham-fight proceeding in total darkness,
two companies playing like boys, beating
tin cups for drums. When some of
them saw me they seemed a little dismayed,
and came and said, beseechingly,
—•“ Cunnel, Sab, you hab no objection
to we playin’, Sab ? ”—which objection
I disclaimed ; but soon they all subsided,
rather to my regret, and scattered
merrily. Afterward I found that some
other officer had told them that I considered
the affair too noisy, so that I felt
a mild self-reproach when one said,
u Cunnel, wish you had let we play a
little longer, Sah.” Still 1 was not sorry,
on the whole ; for these sham fights
between companies would in some regiments
lead to real ones, and there is a
latent jealousy here between the Florida
and South-Carolina men, which sometimes
makes me anxious.
The officers are more kind and patient
with the men than I should expect, since
the former are mostly' young, and drilling
tries the temper; but they are aided
by hearty satisfaction in the results already'
attained. I have never yet heard
a doubt expressed among the officers as
to the superiority of these men to white
troops inaptitude for drill and discipline,
because of their imitativeness and docility,
and the pride they take in the service.
One captain said to me to-day,
*• I have this afternoon taught my men
to load-in-nine-times, and they do it better
than we did it in my former company'
in three months.” I can personally
testify that one of our best lieutenants,
an Englishman, taught a part of
his company the essential movements of
the “ school for skirmishers ” in a single
lesson of two hours, so that they did
them very passably, though 1 feel bound
to discourage such haste. However, I
“ formed square ” on the third battaliondrill.
Three-fourths of drill consist of
attention, imitation, and a good ear for
time; in the other fourth, which consists
of the application of principles, as,
for instance, performing by the left flank
some movement before learned by the
right, they' are perhaps slower than bet-
Officcr’s Journal.
ter-educated men. Having belonged to
five different drill - clubs before entering
the army, I certainly ought to know
something of the resources of human
awkwardness, and I can honestly say
that they astonish me by the facility with
which they do things. I expected much
harder work in this respect.
The habit of carrying burdens on the
head gives them erectness of figure, even
where physically' disabled. I have seen
a woman, with a brimming water-pail
balanced on her head, — or perhaps a
cup, saucer, and spoon, — stop suddenly,
turn round, stoop to pick up a missile,
rise again, fling; it, light a pipe, and go
through many evolutions with either
hand or both, without spilling a drop.
The pipe, by the way, gives an odd look
to a well-dressed young girl on Sunday,
but one often sees that spectacle. The
passion for tobacco among our men continues
quite absorbing, and I have piteous
appeals for some arrangement by
which they can buy' it on credit, as we
have yet no sutler. Their imploring,
“ Cunnel, we can’t lib widout it, Sah,”
goes to my heart; and as they cannot
read, 1 cannot even have the melancholy
satisfaction of supplying them with the
excellent anti - tobacco tracts of Mr.
Trask.
December 19.
Last night the water froze in the adjutant’s
tent, but not in mine. To-day
has been mild and beautiful. The blacks
say they do not feel the cold so much as
the white officers do, and perhaps it is
so, though their health evidently suffers
more from dampness. On the other
hand, while drilling on very warm days,
they have seemed to suffer more from
heat than their officers. But they dearly
love fire, and at night will always have
it, if possible, even on the minutest scale,
— a mere handful of splinters, that seems
hardly more efficacious than a frictionmatch.
Probably this is a natural habit
for the short-lived coolness of an out-door
country'; and then there is something delightful
in this rich pine, which burns like
744
a tar-barrel. It was perhaps encouraged
by the masters, as the only cheap luxury
the slaves had at hand.
As one grows more acquainted with
the men, their individualities emerge;
and I find first their faces, then their
characters, to be as distinct as those of
whites. It is very interesting the desire
they show to do their duty and to improve
as soldiers; they evidently think
about it, and see the importance of the
thing; they say to me that we white men
cannot stay and be their leaders always,
and that they must learn to depend on
themselves, or else relapse into their
former condition.
Beside the superb branch of uneatable
bitter oranges which decks my tent-pole,
I have to-day hung up a long bough of
finger-sponge, which floated to the riverbank.
As winter advances, butterflies
gradually disappear: one species (a Vanessa)
lingers; three others have vanished
since I came. Mocking-birds are
abundant, but rarely sing; once or twice
they have reminded me of the red thrush,
but are inferior, as I have always thought.
The colored people all say that it will be
much cooler; but my officers do not think
so, perhaps because last winter was so
unusually mild, — with only one frost,
they say.
December 20.
Philoprogenitiveness is an important
organ for an officer of colored troops ;
and I happen to be well provided with
it. It seems to be the theory of all military
usages, in fact, that soldiers are to
be treated like children ; and these singular
persons, who never know their own
age till they are past middle life, and
then choose a birthday with such precision,
— “ Fifty year old, Sah, de fins’ last
April,” — prolong the privilege of childhood.
I am perplexed nightly for countersigns,—
their range of proper names is so
distressingly limited, and they make such
amazing work of every new one. At
first, to be sure, they did not quite recognize
the need of any variation: one
[December,
night some officer asked a sentinel whether
he had the countersign yet, and was
indignantly answered. — “ Should tink I
hab ’em, hab ’em for a fortnight ” ; which
seems a long epoch for that magic word
to hold out. To-night I thought I would
have “ Fredericksburg,” in honor of
Burnside’s reported victory, using the
rumor quickly, for fear of a contradiction.
Later, in comes a captain, gets the
countersign for his own use, but presently
returns, the sentinel having pronounced
it incorrect. On inquiry, it
appears that the sergeant of the guard,
being weak in geography, thought best
to substitute the more familiar word,
“ Crockery-ware” ; which was, with perfect
gravity, confided to all the sentinels,
and accepted without question. O life 1
what is the fun of fiction beside thee ?
I Should think they would suffer and
complain, these cold nights; but they say
nothing, though there is a good deal of
coughing. I should fancy that the scarlet
trousers must do something to keep
them warm, and wonder that they dislike
them so much, when they are so
much like their beloved fires. They
certainly multiply fire-light, in any case.
I often notice that an infinitesimal flame,
with one soldier standing by it, looks
like quite a respectable conflagration,
and it seems as if a group of them must
dispel dampness.
December 21.
To a regimental commander no book
can be so fascinating as the consolidated
Morning Report, which is ready about
nine, and tells how many in each company
are sick, absent, on duty, and so
on. It is one’s newspaper and daily mail:
I never grow tired of it. If a single recruit
has' come in, I am always eager to
see how lie looks on paper.
To-night the officers are rather depressed
by rumors of Burnside’s being
defeated, after all. I am fortunately
equable and undepressible; and it is very
convenient that the men know too little
of the events of the war to feel excitement
or fear. They know General Sax-
Leaves from an Officer's Journal.
1864.] Leaves from an 745
ton and me, — “ de General ” and “ de
Cunnel,” — and seem to ask no further
questions. We are the war. It saves a
great deal of trouble, while it lasts, this
childlike confidence; nevertheless, it is
our business to educate them to manhood,
and I see as yet no obstacle. As
for the rumor, the world will no doubt
roll round, whether Burnside is defeated
or succeeds.
Christmas Bay.
“ We ’ll fight for liberty
Till de Lord shall call us home;
We ’ll soon be free
Till de Lord shall call us home.”
This is the hymn which the slaves at
Georgetown, South Carolina, were whipped
for singing when President Lincoln
was elected. So said a little drummerboy,
as lie sat at my tent’s edge last night
and told me his story; and he showed all
his white teeth as he added,— “ Dcy tink
4 de Lord’ meant for say de Yankees.”
Last night, at dress-parade, the adjutant
read General Saxton’s Proclamation
for the New-Year’s Celebration. I think
they understood it, for there was cheering
in all the company-streets afterwards.
Christmas is the great festival of the year
for this people; but, with New-Year’s
coming after, we could have no adequate
programme for to-day, and so celebrated
Christmas Eve with pattern simplicity.
We omitted, namely, the mystic curfew
which we call “ taps,” and let them sit
up and burn their fires and have their
little prayer-meetings as late, as they desired;
and all night, as I waked at intervals,
I could hear them praying and
“ shouting ” and clattering with hands
and heels. I t seemed to faake them very
happy, and appeared to be at least an
innocent Christmas dissipation, as compared
with some of the convivialities of
the “ superior race ” hereabouts.
December 26.
The day passed with no greater excitement
for the men than target-shooting,
VOL. X IV . 48
Officer’s Journal
which they enjoyed. I had the private
delight of the arrival of our much-desired
surgeon and his nephew, the captain,
with letters and news from home. They
also bring the good tidings that General
Saxton is not to be removed, as had been
reported.
Tw’o different stands of colors have arrived
for us, and will be presented at
New-Year’s, — one from friends in New
York, and the other from a lady in Connecticut.
I see that “ Frank Leslie’s Illustrated
Weekly ” of December twentieth
has a highly imaginative picture of
the muster-in of our first company, and
also of a skirmish on the late expedition.
I must not forget the prayer overheard
last night by one of the captains :
— “ O Lord ! when I tink ob dis Ivisinas
and las’ year de Kismas. Las’ Ivismas
he in de Secesh, and notin’ to eat but
grits, and no salt in ’em. Dis year in de
camp, and too much victual ! ” This
“ too much ” is a favorite phrase out of
their grateful hearts, and did not in this
case denote an excess of dinner, — as
might be supposed, — but of thanksgiving.
December 29.
Our new surgeon has begun his work
most efficiently : he and the chaplain have
converted an old gin-house into a comfortable
hospital, with ten nice beds and
straw pallets. He is now, with a hearty
professional faith, looking round for
somebody to put into it. I am afraid the
regiment will accommodate him ; for, although
he declares that these men do not
sham sickness, as he expected, their catarrh
is an unpleasant reality. They
feel the dampness very much, and make
such a coughing at dress-parade that I
have urged him to administer a dose of
cough-mixture, all round, just before
that pageant. Are the colored race
tough f is my present anxiety; and it
is odd that physical insufficiency, the
only discouragement not thrown in our
way by the newspapers, is the only discouragement
which finds any place in
our minds. They are used to sleeping in746
doors in winter, herded before fires, and
so they feel the change. Still, the regiment
is as healthy as the average, and
experience will teach us something.*
December .30.
On the first of January we are to have
a slight collation, ten oxen or so, barbecued,—
or not properly barbecued, but
roasted whole. Touching the length of
time required to “ do” an ox, no two
housekeepers appear to agree. Accounts
vary from two hours to twenty-four. We
shall happily have enough to try all gradations
of roasting, and suit all tastes,
from Miss A.’s to mine. But fancy me
proffering a spare-rib, well done, to some
fair lady! What ever are we to do for
spoons and forks and plates ? Each soldier
has his own, and is sternly held responsible
for it by “ Army Regulations.”
But how provide for the multitude ? Is
it customary, I ask you, to help to tenderloin
with one’s fingers? Fortunately,
the Major is to see to that department.
Great are the advantages of military
discipline : for anything perplexing,
detail a subordinate.
Ne>r-Year's Dve.
My housekeeping at home is not, perhaps,
on any very extravagant scale.
Buying beefsteak, I usually go to the
extent of two or three pounds. Yet
when, this morning at daybreak, the
quartermaster called to inquire how many
cattle I would have killed for roasting,
I turned over in bed, and answered
composedly, “ Ten, — and keep three to
be fatted.”
Fatted, quotha ! Not one of the beasts
at present appears to possess an ounce of
# A Second winter's experience removed all
this solicitude, for. they learned to take care
of themselves. During the first February tire
sick-list averaged about ninety, during the
second about thirty. — this being the worst
month in the year, for blacks. Charity ought,
perhaps, to withhold the information that during
the first winter we had three surgeons, and
during the second only one.
[December,
superfluous flesh. Never were seen such
lean kine. As they swing on vast spits,
composed of young trees, the fire-light
glimmers through their ribs, as if they
were great lanterns. But no matter,
they are cooking,—nay, they are cooked.
One at least is taken off to cool, and
will be replaced to-morrow to warm up.
It was roasted three hours, and well
done, for I tasted it. It is so long since
I tasted fresh beef that forgetfulness is
possible ; but I fancied this to he successful.
I tried to imagine that I liked the
Homeric repast, and certainly the whole
thing has been far more agreeable tban
Was to be expected. The doubt now is,
whether I have made a sufficient provision
for my household. I should have
roughly guessed that ten beeves would
feed as many million people, it lias sucli
a stupendous sound ; but General Saxton
predicts a small social party of five thousand,
and we fear that meat will run
short, unless they prefer bone. One of
the cattle is so small, we are hoping it
may turn out veal.
For drink, we aim at the simple luxury
of molasses-and-water, a barrel per
company, ten in all. Liberal housekeepers
may like to know that for a barrel of
water we allow three gallons of molasses,
half a pound of ginger, and a quart of
vinegar, — this last being a new ingredient
for my untutored palate, though
all the rest are amazed at my ignorance.
Hard bread, with more molasses,
and a dessert of tobacco, complete the
festive repast, destined to cheer, but not
inebriate.
On this last point, of inebriation, this
is certainly a wonderful camp. For us,
it is absolutely omitted from the list of
vices. I have never beard of a glass of
liquor in the camp, nor of any effort either
to bring it' in or to keep it out. A total
absence of the circulating-medium might
explain the abstinence, — not that it
seems to have that effect with white soldiers,
— but it would not explain the silence.
The craving for tobacco is constant
and not to be allayed, like that of
a mother for her children; but I have
Leaves from an Officer s Journal.
1864.] Leaves from an 747
never heard whiskey even wished for,
save on Christmas Day, and then only
by one man, and he spoke with a hopeless
ideal sighing, as one alludes to the
Golden Age. I am amazed at this total
omission of the most inconvenient of all
camp-appetites. It certainly is not the
result of exhortation, for there has been
no occasion for any, and even the pledge
would scarcely seem efficacious where
hardly anybody can write.
I do not think there is a great visible
eagerness for to-morrow’s festival: it is
not their way to be very jubilant over
anything this side of the New Jerusalem.
They know also that those in this Department
are nominally free already, and
that the practical freedom has to be maintained,
in any event, by military success.
But they will enjoy it greatly, and we
shall have a multitude of people.
January 1,1863 fevening).
A happy New-Year to civilized people,—
mere white folks. Our festival has
come and gone, with perfect success, and
our good General has been altogether
satisfied. Last night the great fires were
kept smouldering in the pits, and the
beeves were cooked more or less, chiefly
more, — during which time they had to
be carefully watched, and the great spits
turned by main force. Happy were the
merry fellows who were permitted to sit
up all night, and watch the glimmering
flames that threw a thousand fantastic
shadows among the great gnarled oaks.
And such a chattering as I was sure to
hear, whenever I awoke, that night!
My first greeting to-day was from one
of the most stylish sergeants, who approached
me with the following little
speech, evidently the result of some elaboration
' —-
“ I tink myself happy, dis New-Year’s
Day, for salute my own Cunnel. Dis
day' las’ yrear I was servant to a Cunnel
ob Secesh; but now I hab do privilege
for salute my own Cunnel.”
That officer, with the utmost sincerity,
reciprocated the sentiment.
Officer’s Journal.
About ten o’clock the people began to
collect by land, and also by water, — in
steamers sent by General Saxton for the
purpose ; and from that time all the avenues
of approach were thronged. The
multitude were chiefly colored women,
with gav handkerchiefs on their heads,
and a sprinkling of men, with that peculiarly
respectable look which these people
always have on Sundays and holidays.
There were many white visitors also, —
ladies on horseback and in carriages, superintendents
and teachers, officers and
cavahy-men. Our companies were marched
to the neighborhood of the platform,
and allowed to sit or stand, as at the
Sunday services ; the platform was occupied
by' ladies and dignitaries, and by
the band of the Eighth Maine, which
kindly volunteered for the occasion ; the
colored people filled up all the vacant
openings in the beautiful grove around,
and there was a cordon of mounted visitors
beyond. Above, the great live-oak
branches and their trailing moss; beyond
the people, a glimpse of the blue
river.
The services began at half-past eleven
o'clock, with prayer by' our chaplain, Mr.
Fowler, who is always, on such occasions,
simple, reverential, and impressive. Then
the President’s Proclamation was read
by Dr. W. II. Brisbane, a thing infinitely
appropriate, a South-Carolinian addressing
South-Carolinians; for he was reared
among these very islands, and here long
since emancipated his own slaves. Then
the colors were presented to us by the
Rev. Mr. French, a chaplain who brought
them from the donors in New York. All
this was according to the programme.
Then followed an incident so simple,
so touching, so utterly unexpected and
startling, that I can scarcely believe it
on recalling, though it gave the key-note
to the whole day. The very moment the
speaker had ceased, and just as I took
and waved the flag, which now for the
first time meant any thing to these poor
people, there suddenly arose, close beside
the platform, a strong male voice,
(but rather cracked and elderly,) in748
Leaves from an
to which two women’s voices instantly
blended, singing, as if by an impulse that
could no more be repressed than the
ihorning note of the song-sparrow,—
“ My Country, ’t is of thee,
Sweet land of liberty,
Of thee I sing! ”
People looked at each other, and then
at us on the platform, to see whence came
this interruption, not set down in the
bills. Firmly and irrepressibly the quavering
voices sang on, verse after verse ;
others of the colored people joined in ;
some whites on the platform began, but
I motioned them to silence. I never saw
anything so electric; it made all other
words cheap ; it seemed the choked voice
of a race at last unloosed. Nothing
could be more wonderfully unconscious ;
art could not have dreamed of a tribute
to the day of jubilee that should be so
affecting; history will not believe i t ; and
when I came to speak of it, after it was
ended, tears were everywhere. If you
could have heard how quaint and innocent
it was ! Old Tiff and his children
might have sung i t ; and close before me
was a little slave-boy, almost white, who
seemed to belong to the party, and even
he must join in. Just think of it 1 — the
first day they had ever had a country,
the first flag they had ever seen which
promised anything to their people, and
here, while mere spectators stood in silence,
waiting for my stupid words, these
simple souls burst out in their lay, as if
they were by their own hearths at home 1
When they stopped, there was nothing
Officer’s Journal. [December,
to do for it hut to speak, and I went on ;
but the life of the whole day was in those
unknown people’s song.
Receiving the flags, I gave them into
the hands of two fine-looking men, jetblack,
as color - guard, and they also
spoke, and very effectively, ■— Sergeant
Prince Rivers and Corporal Robert Sutton.
The regiment sang “ Marching
Along,” and then G eneral Saxton spoke,
in his own simple, manly way, and Mrs.
Frances D. Gage spoke very sensibly to
the women, and Judge Stiekney, from
Florida, added something; then some
gentlemen sang an ode, and the regiment
the John Brown song, and then
they went to their beef and molasses.
Everything was very orderly, and they
seemed to have a very gay time. Most
of the visitors had far to go, and so dispersed
before dress-parade, though the
band stayed to enliven it. In the evening
■we had letters from home, and General
Saxton had a reception at his house,
from which I excused myself; and so
ended one of the most enthusiastic and
happy gatherings I ever knew. The day
was perfect, and there was nothing but
. success.
I forgot to say, that, in the midst of the
services, it was announced that General
Fremont was appointed Commander-in-
Chief,—an announcement which was received
with immense cheering, as would
have been almost anything else, I verily
believe, at that moment of higli-tide. It
was shouted across by the pickets above,
—a way in which we often receive news,
but not always trustworthy.