Adrift  in  Dixie; 


A  Yankee  Officer  among  the  Rebels. 

WITH     AN     INTRODUCTION     BY 
EDMUND    KIRKE, 

AUTHOR    OF     "among    THE    PINES,"     "  MY    SOUTHERN    FRIENDS,"    "  DOWN    IN 
TENNESSEE,"    "AMONG  THE  GUERILLAS,"   "  ON  THE  BORDER,"  ETC 


NE W    YORK ; 

M  DCCC  LXVI. 


Entered,  according  to  Acfl  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1866,  by 

JAMES   R.   GILMORE, 

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  Districft  Court  of  the  Distridl  of  Massachusetts, 


Boston: 
Geo.  C.  Rand  &  Avery,  Stereotypers  and  Printers, 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 

Introduction    9 


CHAPTER   I. 
A   Prisoner 41 

CHAPTER   n.  . 
Escape d^ 

CHAPTER   in. 
Inland   Navigation 107 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Overland   Travel •.    .    .    149 

5 


INTRODUCTION. 


INTRODUCTION, 


As  this  volume  is  given  to  the  public  solely  at 
the  suggestion  of  the  writer  of  this,  it  may  be 
proper  that  he  should  prefix  to  it  a  few  words  by 
way  of  introduction. 

The  author  is  Henry  L.  Estabrooks,  a  young 
gentleman  of  Dorchester,  Mass.,  who,  throughout 
the  war,  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  Twenty-sixth  Regi- 
ment of  Massachusetts  infantry,  and,  being  taken 
prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Berryville,  passed  over  for- 
ty days  in  wandering  through  the  Rebel  country. 
He  was  at  first  sent  to  the  Libby  Prison,  but,  in  a 
short  time,  was  conveyed  from  there  to  the  railway 
for  removal  to  the  Far  South.  On  the  route,  he 
contrived  to  escape  from  the  cars,  and  after  a  jour- 
ney of  thirty  days,  performed  on  foot  and  mostly 
at  night,  over  guarded  roads  and  along  a  danger- 
ous river,  managed  to  get  to  the  Union  lines. 


10  INTRODUCTION. 

General  Grant  gave  him  at  once  a  furlough ; 
and,  going  home,  he  wrote  out,  while  its  every  in- 
cident was  fresh  in  his  memory,  the  following  nar- 
rative of  his  most  remarkable  journey. 

The  narrative  was  not  intended  for  publication, 
and  for  long  was  seen  only  by  the  partial  friends 
who  gather  under  the  ^'  old  roof-tree ; "  but,  after 
being  read  and  re-read  around  the  family  fireside, 
it  crept  out  ioto  the  colder  outside  air,  and,  one 
wintry  morning,  galloped  across  several  miles  of 
hilly  country,  and  pulled  up  at  my  doorway. 

I  took  it  in,  and  gave  it  a  warm  place  by  the 
winter  fire.  I  could  not  do  otherwise :  for  a  pair 
of  bright  eyes,  rosy  cheeks,  and  smiling  lips,  came 
with  it,  and  said  to  me  (the  lips,  I  mean),  "  It  is 
true,  Mr.  Kirke ;  and  you  will  be  interested  in  it ; 
for  it  tells  how  faithful  and  kind  the  Southern  ne- 
groes were  to  one  who  had  no  claim  on  them  other 
than  being  a  Northern  man  and  a  Union  soldier." 

I  sat  down  to  the  manuscript,  and,  before  rising, 
had  read  it  through  from  end  to  end.  It  not  only 
interested,  it  delighted  me  ;  for  it  gave  me  my  first 


INTRODUCTION.  11 

vivid  idea  of  the  present  disposition  and  feelings 
of  the  Southern  negroes.  The  newspapers  had 
said  in  a  general  way  that  they  were  loyal ;  that 
they  had  performed  important  services  to  our  ar- 
mies, often  warning  them  of  danger,  and  guiding 
them  to  victory  :  but  this  narrative,  in  a  series  of 
graphic  pictures  evidently  drawn  from  life,  showed 
how,  at  imminent  risk,  they  had  harbored  and  be- 
friended our  escaping  soldiers,  given  them  of  their 
meagre  food  and  their  scanty  clothing,  and  led 
them,  in  the  cold  storm  and  the  starless  midnight, 
through  pathless  woods  and  trackless  swamps, 
safely  to  the  lines  of  our  armies. 

"  This  narrative  should  be  published,''  I  said  to 
the  rosy-cheeked  messenger ;  "  for  it  tells  what  the 
North  does  not  as  yet  fully  realize, —  the  great  fact 
that  in  the  very  heart  of  the  South  are  four  mil- 
lions of  people,  —  of  strong,  able-bodied,  true-heart- 
ed people,  —  whose  loyalty  led  them,  while  the  heel 
of  the  '^  chivalry  "  was  on  their  necks,  and  a  halter 
was  dangling  before  their  eyes,  to  give  their  last 
crust,  and  their  only  suit  of  Sunday  homespun,  to 


12  INTltODUCTlON.. 

the  fleeing  fugitive,  simply  because  he  wore  the 
livery  and  fought  the  battles  of  the  Union.'' 

''  Do  with  it  as  you  like,"  said  the  rosy-cheeked 
messenger.  ^^  We  owe  my  brother's  life  to  the  ne- 
groes ;  and  you  can  publish  his  journal,  if  you 
think  it  will  do  them  any  good." 

That  same  evening  a  gentleman  came  to  my 
house,  who,  once  a  week,  reminds  an  intelligent 
congregation  that  '^  God  hath  made  of  one  blood 
all  nations  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  earth ; " 
and  I  mentioned  to  him  the  narrative ,  and  my 
thought  of  giving  it  to  the  public.  "  Don't  do  it," 
he  said  very  decidedly :  "  we  have  heard  enough 
about  the  negro." 

•  ''  Enough  of  him,"  I  answered,  "  as  a  slave,  but 
scarcely  any  thing  of  him  while  looking  and  wait- 
ing for  freedom.  If  his  patience  and  fortitude, 
and  fidelity  to  the  Union  during  the  war,  are  fully 
shown,  it  may  help  to  secure  him  his  full  rights 
as  a  freeman." 

"  But  you  wouldn't  give  him  all  the  rights  of  a 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

citizen  ?  You  certainly  know  he  is  not  fit  for  suf- 
frage." 

''  Why  not  fit  for  suffrage?  " 

''  Because  of  his  ignorance.  Not  one  in  twenty 
of  the  negroes  can  read  or  write." 

"  Neitlier  can  one  in  four  of  the  voters  in  our 
Northern  cities.  If  reading  and  writing  were 
necessary  qualifications  to  citizenship,  Alexander 
the  Great,  and  probably  ten  of  the  twelve  apostles, 
would  have  been  denied  a  country.  My  notion  is, 
that  there  is  an  education  which  is  better  than 
that  had  from  books,  —  that  which  a  man  gets  in 
the  school  of  hard  work  and  adversity.  The  ne- 
groes have  that  sort  of  education." 

"  But  they  won't  work  for  wages :  they'll  only 
labor  on  compulsion.  We  hear  that  by  every 
mail  from  the  South." 

"  That  doesn't  prove  it  true  ;  but,  if  it  be  true,  it 
shows  only  that  the  negro  knows  his  late  master, 
and  fears  to  trust  him  till  the  end  of  harvest.  He 
fears,  that,  after  getting  his  work,  he  will  cheat  him 
of  his  wages.     Neither  you  nor  I  will  work  if  un- 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

certain  of  our  pay.  A  dozen  Southern  planters 
have  told  me,  since  the  war,  that  the  negro  will 
labor  willingly  if  paid  every  Saturday." 

"Well,  well!  The  nigger  is  black.  We  must 
have  a  white  country ;  and  we  can't  have  it  if  we 
let  him  vote,  and  hold  office." 

"  We  can't  have  it  anyway.  Providence  never 
meant  we  should  have  it :  if  it  had,  it  would  not 
have  allowed  the  slave-trade  to  empty  upon  us  so 
much  of  Africa." 

Much  more  was  said ;  but  this  is  what  rested  on 
my  mind,  and  decided  me  to  give  this  little  volume 
to  a  publisher;  for  it  fully  overturns  the  positions 
of  my  clerical  friend,  —  that  the  negro  is  black,  ig- 
norant, and  unwilling  to  work  :  and  these  ''  facts  " 
are,  I  believe,  the  staple  arguments  of  the  oppo- 
nents of  negro  suffrage. 

The  narrative  proves  that  the  negro  will  work  ; 
for  the  people  in  this  book  —  all  of  them —  worked 
faithfully  and  willingly  in  the  midst  of  war,  when 
nearly  every  white  man  was  in  the  Rebel  armies, 


INTE  OD  UCTION,  1 5 

and  too  far  away  to  employ  either  moral  suasion  or 
compulsion  upon  their  slaves. 

It  proves,  too,  that  the  negro  is  not  black. 
Color,  like  beauty,  is  only  skin-deep;  and  the  men 
who  helped  this  young  officer  to  his  life  and  free- 
dom showed  that  they  had  souls  of  the  very 
whitest  complexion. 

It  proves  also  that  he  is  not  ignorant.  These 
men  knew  their  country ;  recognized  and  succored 
one  of  its  friends ;  chide d  him  when  he  spoke 
harshly  of  his  enemies  ;  and  recognized  their  de- 
pendence on  God  by  kneeling  on  the  rocky  bank 
of  the  Dan,  and  asking  him  to  guide  the  tired  fugi- 
tive safely  along  its  dangerous  current.  If  such 
knowledge  is  not  the  highest  kind  of  knowledge, 
then  every  pulpit  in  this  broad  country  tells  a 
weekly  falsehood. 

But,  after  all,  many  of  my  readers  will  persist 
in  believing  that  the  Southern  negro  is  black, 
ignorant,  and  unwilling  to  work.  It  may  be,  that, 
using  words  in  the  usual  way,  this  is  true :  but  if 
it  be  true  of  the  negro,  it  is  equally  true  of  the 


16  INTRODUCTION. 

"  chivalry ; "  and,  by  the  chivahy,  I  do  not  mean 
the  masses  of  the  South,  but  those  fifty  thousand 
or  more  aristocrats  who  have  ground  the  negro 
to  the  earth,  and  brought  upon  the  country  a  war 
without  a  parallel  in  history,  solely  to  make  end- 
less the  system  which  was  crushing  out  of  the 
Southern  working-man  —  white  as  well  as  black  — 
nearly  every  vestige  of  manhood. 

I  insist  that  the  chivalry  are  black,  ignorant,  and 
unwilHng  to  work ;  and,  if  those  things  disqualify 
the  negroes  for  citizenship  in  a  white  republic, 
they  equally  disqualify  the  "  chivalry." 

They  are  unwilling  to  work.  They  have  always 
wrung  their  bread  from  the  bloody  sweat  of  other 
men;  always  been  barren  trees,  drawing  its  rich 
juices  from  the  soil,  and  giving  out  in  return 
no  blossoms  and  no  fruit.  "  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work,"  was  said  by  Him  who  came 
on  earth  to  show  us  the  highest  type  of  manhood ; 
but  these  men  have  called  that  a  disgrace  which 
he  esteemed  an  honor,  branded  that  as  shame 
which  he  made  the  badge  of  the  highest  nobility. 


INTR  OD  UCTION.  \  7 

They  are  ignorant;  ignorant  of  the  first  rudi- 
ments of  nineteenth-century  knowledge,  that  "  all 
men  are  created  equal  (before  the  law),  and  en- 
dowed by  the  Creator  with  certain  inalienable 
rights ;  "  and  they  are  ignorant,  too,  of  that  funda- 
mental principle  of  political  economy,  —  that  pov- 
erty and  degradation  in  one  class  entail  poverty 
and  degradation  upon  all  other  classes  in  a  nation. 

And  they  are  black,  and  black  because  they 
have  withheld  his  rights  from  the  negro.  In  his 
earliest  infancy,  the  scion  of  the  chivalry  has 
learned  that  he  could  domineer,  unchecked,  over 
small  colored  humanity ;  and,  when  old  enough  to 
go  to  the  neighboring  village-school,  he  has  seen 
ever  at  his  heels  an  image  of  God,  cut  in  ebony, 
which  grinned  when  he  grinned,  and  was  struck 
with  lightning  whenever  he  thundered  forth  the 
big  words  so  common  to  Young  America  North  and 
South.  And,  when  coming  up  to  manhood,  he  has 
seen  all  of  the  world  with  which  he  was  acquainted 
— his  father's  black  slaves,  and  his  equally  obsequi- 
ous white  vassals  --  making  obeisance  to  him  as  if 


18  INTRODUCTIOK. 

lie  were  of  better  clay  than  they.  Is  it  strange, 
then,  that  he  has  grown  up  to  think  he  is  monarch 
of  all  he  surveys,  and  that,  at  his  frown,  all  creation 
should  tremble  ?  Is  it  strange,  with  no  check  on 
his  passions,  no  bridle  on  his  will,  that  he  should, 
as  a  man,  be  proud,  passionate,  treacherous,  re- 
vengeful, overbearing,  and  greedy  of  power  ? 

These  are  the  traits  of  his  class :  of  course  I 
speak  of  the  class  ;  for  there  are  many  exceptions. 
Everywhere  there  are  men  in  whom  God  has  im- 
planted so  much  of  the  principle  of  goodness,  that 
it  cannot  be  dwarfed  by  the  most  barren  soil,  or 
chilled  by  the  most  icy  atmosphere  ;  and  there  are 
such  men — many  of  them  —  among  the  ^*  chivalry  " 
of  the  South.  But,  as  a  class,  they  are  all  that  I  say. 
In  all  the  traits  I  have  named,  they  are  the  equals 
of  Satan ;  and  in  political  cunning  and  dishonesty 
they  outdo  "the  wild  devil  withal,"  and  almost 
equal  some  of  our  Northern  politicians. 

And  is  it  to  these  men,  who  are  born  aristocrats, 
who  have  no  one  principle  or  feeling  in  harmony 
with  republican  institutions,  who  are  black  with  a 


INTRODUCTION.  19 

blackness  which  is  ingrained,  —  has  struck  inwards, 
and  dyed  their  very  souls,  —  that  we  would  commit 
again  the  government  of  the  South,  while  we  deny 
to  the  other  black  men,  whose  skins  only  are  col- 
ored, the  right  to  say  at  the  ballot-box  that  they 
are  men,  and  that  white  men,  with  white  souls, 
shall  rule  over  them  ? 

Do  we  forget  that  a  small  bonfire  was  lit  on 
Boston  Common  thirty  years  ago,  whose  ascending 
flames  traced  on  the  sky,  as  with  the  finger  of  God, 
the  words,  "  Freedom  for  all  men,  black  as  well  as 
white  "  ? 

It  was  only  a  small  bonfire ;  but  it  spread,  — 
spread  wider  *and  wider,  and  waxed  brighter  and 
brighter,  until  it  illuminated  the  whole  North,  and 
showed  three  millions  of  freemen  their  true  inter- 
ests, and  made  them  sa}^  at  the  polls,  "  Thus  far 
shall  slavery  come,  and  no  farther  ;  and  here  shall 
its  dark  waves  be  stayed." 

Intrenched  behind  the  Constitution,  which  se- 
cured to  each  State  the  undisturbed  control  of  its 
domestic  concerns,  we  expected  that  the  "  chival- 


20  INTR  OD  UCTION. 

ry  "  would  fold  their  arms,  and  gaze  calmly  on  that 
advancing  conflagration.  But  they  did  not.  They 
were  not  like  a  Boston  merchant  I  once  knew,  who, 
when  told  that  his  warehouse  was  in  flames,  coolly 
replied,  "  It  can't  be  possible ;  for  I've  the  key  in 
my  pocket."  They  had  the  keys  in  their  pockets, 
and  the  Constitution  had  double-locked  the  door: 
but  they  knew  that  fire  is  an  element  that  does 
not  always  knock  at  doorways ;  that  it  sometimes 
enters  at  windows,  and  sometimes  kindles  within 
the  building  itself. 

Already  that  Northern  fire  had  run  down  into 
Maryland  and  Delaware  ;  already  it  had  spanned 
the  Ohio,  and  set  Northern  Kentucky  and  Western 
Virginia  in  a  blaze  ;  already  it  had  leaped  the  Mis- 
souri border,  and  lit  there  a  bonfire  to  freedom  that 
would  never  go  out.  If  it  came  nearer,  if  it 
crossed  the  tobacco  States,  and  lit  up  the  dark  at- 
mosphere of  Cottondom,  would  not  the  Southern 
masses  —  white  and  black  —  see  by  it  their  true 
interests,  as  the  Northern  masses  had  done,  and 
kindle  a  flame  within  the  sacred  edifice  itself,  that 


INTRODUCTION.  21 

would  topple  it  dowii^a  blackened  ruin,  in  a  night  ? 
They  would.  The  "  chivalry "  knew  that  they 
would,  and  therein  they  saw  their  danger. 

How  to  stay  the  farther  progress  of  that  fire 
Southwards,  was,  therefore,  the  question.  How 
could  it  be  done?  How  does  the  traveller,  who 
sees  afar  off  on  the  prairie  a  mighty  conflagration 
lighting  the  whole  heavens,  escape  the  impending 
flames?  Not  by  flight;  for  foot  of  man  or  beast 
never  yet  outstripped  that  forked  fire  that  jour- 
neys on  the  wings  of  the  wind.  No :  the  traveller 
does  not  flee.  He  gathers  a  few  dead  leaves,  he 
splits  a  few  dry  fagots ;  he  heaps  them  together, 
and  kindles  a  counter-fire  ;  and  behind  its  flames  he 
is  safe.  The  sky  may  be  hung  with  black,  the 
earth  may  be  darkened  with  ruin,  the  sun  itself 
may  seem  stricken  from  the  heavens  ;  but  the  trav- 
eller is  safe. 

So  it  was  like  to  have  been  with  the  '^  chivalry." 
They  saw  that  small  bonfire  kindling  thirty  years 
ago  on  Boston  Common ;  they  saw  it  spreading 
from  one  free  State  to  another,  and  then  lighting 


22  ly  TROD  UCTJOX. 

up  the  wliole  Northern  and  EastLM'n  sky;  and  they 
saw  it  at  hvst  leaping  t!ie  ben-der  into  their  own  do- 
minions;  and  they  did  not  run  :  ibr  salety  was  not 
in  flight ;  it  was,  they  thought,  in  a  eounter-tire. 
So  they  gathered  a  tew  dead  leaves,  spht  a  few  dry 
flxgots,  —  they  split  the  last  fagot  when  they  split 
the  Charleston  Convention,  —  they  heaped  them 
together,  :ind  touehed  a  mateh  to  the  pile  :  it 
was  a  lueifer  mateh,  smelHuir  of  brimstone,  and 
bearing  the  brand  of  the  Devil  himself.  They 
touehed  tliat  mateh  at  Fort  Sumter,  and  the  llames 
have  covered  the  continent.  The  skv  is  hunir 
with  black:  the  earth  is  darkened  with  ruin:  the 
sun  itself  seems  stricken  from  the  heavens ;  and 
five  hundred  thousand  human  beings  have  perished 
in  the  flames :  but  noAv,  thanks  to  the  two  hundred 
thousand  black  men  who  builded  a  fire  in  their 
rear,  the  ^'  chivalry ''  ai'o  encircled  with  the  flames 
their  own  hands  enkindled. 

I  say,  thanks  to  the  two  hundred  thousand  black 
men ;  for,  deny  it  as  we  may,  our  black  soldiers 


INTRODUCTION.  23 

\vere  the  feather  which  broke  the  back  of  the  Re- 
belHoii. 

And  now,  with  hypocritical  hearts  and  cringing 
knees,  and  hands  yet  wet  and  dripping  with  our 
brave  boys'  blood,  the  chivalry  stand  amid  all  this 
death  and  desolation,  seeking  to  recover  by  fraud 
the  power  they  have  lost  by  their  crimes ;  wanting 
to  do  with  the  ballot  what  they  have  failed  to  do 
with  the  fire  I 

Shall  we  let  them  do  it  ?  Must  there  be  another 
war,  another  funeral-pile  builded  of  half  a  million 
lives,  before  the  country  learns  that  there  is  no  faith 
nor  honor  nor  honesty  in  these  men ;  that  they 
must  be  disfranchised,  be  forever  denied  the  power 
they  have  so  wickedly  abused,  and  be  made  to 
give  place  to  the  honest  working-men  —  black  and 
white  —  who  are  to  till  the  Southern  fields,  and  be 
the  real  South  of  the  Future  ? 

I  would  not  be  misunderstood.  I  have  no  senti- 
mental  love  for  the  negro.  I  think  him  a  man, 
and,  giving  him  all  the  rights  of  a  man,  would  let 
him  work  out  his  own  salvation.     I  would  do  the 


24  INTRODUCTION. 

same  with  the  "  chivahy."     I  would  let  them  hold 

property,  live  in  peace,  and  know  the  blessing  of 

earning  their  bread  by  the  sweat  of  their  brows ; 

but  I  would  not  let   them  again  guide   Southern 

opinion,  make  laws   to    regulate    Southern   labor, 

or  again  control  the  legislation  of  the  country. 

All  this  they  will  do,  if  we  give  them  back  the 

elective  franchise,  and  do  not,  at  the  same  time, 

put  a  ballot   into   the    hand   of    every   Southern 

negro. 

EDMUND  IHKKE. 


ADRIFT    IN   DIXIE, 


25 


ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE, 


CHAPTER    I. 


A   PRISONER. 


ON  the  eighteentli  of  September,  1864,  General 
Grant  came  into  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah  to 
communicate  with  our  commander,  General  Sheridan.  The 
same  afternoon,  the  army  received  orders  to  break  camp, 
and,  at  two  o'clock  on  the  following  morning,  marched 
out  of  its  breastworks,  and  up  the  valley.  Conjecture 
was  busy  about  our  destination;  some  thinking  we  were 
going  out  to  fight,  others  that  we  were  marching  by  the 
way  of  Berryville  and  Snicker's  Gap  to  the  protection 
of  Washington. 

Winchester,  which  the  Rebel  army  occupied,  was  at  our 
right;  and  Snicker's  Gap,  thi'ough  which  ran  the  road  to 
Washington,  on  our  left.  Our  company  was  in  the 
advance,    and,   being    nearest    the    cross  -  roads,   saw   the 

41 


42  ADRIFT  IN   DIXIE. 

head  of  the  column  when  it  turned  to  the  right.  So  we 
were  about  to  measure  strength  with  Early's  legions ! 
Sober  thoughts  came  to  all;  but  not  a  man  showed  signs 
of  fear :  and  we  pressed  on  as  rapidly  as  possible,  keeping 
over  the  open  fields  to  give  the  wagon-trains  unobstructed 
use  of  the  high-roads.  We  marched  until  near  daybreak, 
passing  continually  scraps  of  fortifications,  and  now  and 
then  a  complete  line,  stretching  far  off  into  the  gray  dark- 
ness ;  and  then  halted  to  allow  the  sixth  and  eighth  corps 
to  take  the  advance. 

September  nineteenth.  —  A  little  after  sunrise  we  were 
again  in  motion,  and  pressing  on  at  the  double-quick 
towards  Winchester.  Far  away  were  high  hills,  with 
little  strips  of  yellow  about  their  tops,  denoting  fortifica- 
tions; and,  nearer  by,  a  long  wreath  of  white  smoke  was 
curling  upward  in  the  clear  air.  Towards  this  smoke  we 
were  hurrying.  At  last  we  reached  a  muddy  stream 
runnmg  over  rocks  and  sand.  It  was  the  Opequan  Creek ; 
and  there  we  saw  our  first  wounded  man,  lying  near  the 
smoking  ruins  of  a  flouring  -  mill,  which  a  body  of  our 
cavalry  had  destroyed  the  night  before. 

Fording  the  stream,  we  soon  came  upon  our  wagon- 
trains  and  ambulances,  packed  in  great  squares   on  either 


A   PRISONER.  43 

side  of  the  road.  Two  of  our  companies,  acting  as  Sheri- 
dan's headquarters'  guard,  greeted  us  noisily  as  we  went 
by ;  and  then  we  pressed  on,  passing  a  great  many  dead 
horses  in  all  stages  of  decay,  some  of  them  poisoning  the 
very  air,  and  soon  entered  a  narrow  defile,  our  two  brigades 
crowding  along  a  road  scarcely  wide  enough  for  one  to  march 
comfortably.  At  the  entrance  of  this  defile,  we  encountered 
about  a  hundred  and  fifty  Rebel  prisoners,  some  of  them 
wounded,  and,  a  little  farther  on,  came  upon  a  field-hospi- 
tal, with  detached  legs,  arms,  hands,  feet,  and  every  form 
of  mangled  humanity,  scattered  about  on  the  green  grass 
around  it.  It  was  not  a  pleasant  sight  to  one  every  moment 
nearing  its  cause;  and,  with  compressed  lips,  we  hurried 
sternly  forward. 

Soon  afterwards  we  reached  the  farther  end  of  the  pass, 
and,  bearing  off"  to  the  edge  of  a  wood  on  the  right,  formed 
in  the  front  line  ;  the  other  brigades  of  our  division  forming 
in  our  rear.  We  remained  here  nearly  an  hour,  a  fierce 
cannonade  meanwhile  going  on  directly  at  our  left.  During 
this  hour,  some  of  us  took  a  little  nap,  others  a  Httle  coffee ; 
but  nearly  all  stood  silently  waiting,  and  thinking  of  the 
impending  struggle.  Meanwhile,  Company  I,  of  our  regi- 
ment,  had   been   sent   to   the    front   as   skirmishers,    with 


44  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

orders  to  move  forward  until  they  found  sometbing.  We 
soon  knew  by  the  reports  of  their  muskets  that  they  had 
found  it;  and,  an  orderly  riding  up,  we  were  ordered  to 
move  forward  into  the  battle. 

Pressing  on  through  the  wood,  we  soon  came  to  its  outer 
edge,  and  saw  dense  masses  of  men,  in  brownish-gray,  with 
glittering  bayonets,  and  a  multitude  of  blood-red,  star-crossed 
battle-flags  drawn  up  directly  in  our  front.  Here  and  there 
a  battery  was  hurling  fire  and  smoke;  and  away  to  the 
left,  moving  forward  in  unison  with  us,  was  a  long  line  of 
blue,  among  which  the  Rebel  shot  and  canister  were  bursting 
with  fearful  rapidity.  Now  and  then  a  man  fell  out  of  the 
ranks;  but  the  great  mass  moved  swiftly  on,  steady  and 
grand,  as  the  ocean-wave  moves  upon  the  shore. 

Another  small  wood,  obstructed  with  thick  underbrush, 
lay  between  us  and  the  enemy.  We  broke  through  it,  and 
then  were  so  near  that  we  could  see  the  very  color  of  their 
eyes.  Without  waiting  for  orders,  our  men  gave  a  shout 
and  rushed  forward,  fixing  bayonets  and  running  over  skir- 
mishers as  they  went.  The  Rebels  paused  a  moment,  and 
looked  at  us;  then  broke,  battle-flags  and  all,  running  in 
utter  confusion  across  the  open  field,  and  to  a  dense  wood 
in  the  distance.     There  they  made  a  short  stand,  but  did 


A   PRISONER.  45 

not  wait  for  us  to  get  among  them  before  they  were  up  and 
away  again,  our  bullets  planting  them  in  gray  heaps  about 
the  woods  and  cornfields.  At  last  our  brigade  was  so  far  ii 
advance,  that  we  had  to  turn  back,  and  wait  for  support 
to  save  the  whole  line  from  being  broken. 

At  this  time  I  noticed  a  few  Rebels  in  a  ravine  directly 
in  our  front,  and  beckoned  to  them  to  come  in  and  give 
themselves  up.  They  appeared  disinclined  to  accept  the 
invitation ;  in  fact,  seemed  making  up  their  minds  to  go  the 
other  way  :  and  I  ran  down  among  them,  followed  by  several 
of  my  men.  I  had  no  pistol ;  but,  putting  my  sword-point  at 
the  breast  of  one,  I  demanded  his  rifle.  He  gave  it  up  re- 
luctantly, for  it  was  capped  and  loaded ;  and  I  ordered  him 
and  another  to  the  rear,  while  my  men  managed  the  rest  of 
the  party.  Then  I  returned  to  the  crest  of  the  ravine,  and 
got  a  good  shot  at  the  main  body,  which  was  not  yet  out  of 
point-blank  range.  By  this  time,  the  Rebels  in  the  distance, 
having  brought  eight  guns  to  bear  on  the  point  where  we 
were,  opened  upon  us  a  fire  of  grape  and  canister  which  was 
perfectly  murderous.  The  ravine  was  very  shallow,  and  the 
Rebels  fired  very  low ;  but  our  regiment  lay  down,  and  the 
ground  gave  them  some  protection.  One  of  the  Rebel 
batteries  soon  raked  the  ravine ;  and,  looking  back,  I  saw 


46  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

our  poor  fellows  dropping  every  here  and  there.  Corporal 
Wordell  crept  out  of  the  wood,  the  blood  pourmg  down  his 
leg  in  a  stream ;  but  he  crawled  along,  and  joined  his  com- 
pany :  and  Captain  Chapman,  just  behind  me,  threw  up  his 
arms,  while  a  red  spurt,  gushing  from  his  head,  showed 
that  he  was  badly  wounded.  All  this  and  much  more  I  saw 
while  tearing  off  a  cartridge  I  had  just  begged  from  one  of 
the  men. 

I  emptied  the  powder  into  the  piece,  and  was  about  to 
drive  the  bullet  home,  when  I  saw  a  sight  that  startled  me. 
It  was  the  Kebels  rolling  back  in  a  fierce  wave  directly  upon 
us.  I  cried  out  to  my  men,  "  Take  them  as  they  come  over 
the  ridge  !  " 

But  our  line  was  rapidly  melting  away  to  the  rear. 
Some  of  the  officers  tried  to  rally  the  regiment ;  but  it  was 
of  no  avail :  and  a  handful  of  us  were  left  to  oppose  a  whole 
Kebel  division.  It  was  nearly  upon  us,  shouting  to  us  to 
surrender,  and  shooting  down  almost  every  man  as  it  swept 
forward. 

It  was  madness  to  stay  there ;  and,  throwing  down  the  rifle 
I  had  not  had  time  to  load,  I  started  toward  our  right  and 
rear  just  as  the  Rebels  struck  our  left.  I  had  not  gone  a 
dozen  yards,  however,  before  they  were  within   thirty  feet, 


A  PlilSONUIi.  47 

their  bullets  flying  all  about.  A  ditch  was  directly  in  ad- 
vance ;  and,  springing  into  it,  I  ran  along  its  side  :  but  a 
mounted  Rebel  rode  before  the  others,  and  headed  me  off. 
As  he  came  up,  he  levelled  his  pistol ;  but  I  fell  flat  forward, 
avoiding  his  shot,  and  thinking  he  might  suppose  me  dead. 
For  his  purpose,  however,  a  dead  officer  was  just  as  good  as  a 
live  one  ;  and  my  ruse  did  not  avail  me.  Calling  me  a 
number  of  impolite  names,  he  raised  his  pistol,  but  suddenly 
altered  his  mind,  and  ordered  me  to  give  him  all  I  had.  I 
remonstrated  rather  feebly ;  but  he  had  the  best  of  the  ar- 
gument. I  produced  first  a  soiled  handkerchief,  which  he 
contemptuously  threw  on  the  gi'ound,  and  then,  after  con- 
siderable delay,  and  tugging  at  the  straps  and  strings,  my 
haversack  and  canteen;  devoutly  hoping  every  moment  to 
see  hun  fall  from  his  horse,  hit  by  the  balls  of  our  men, 
which  were  flying  by  quite  briskly.  Cursing  me  for  my 
slowness,  he  told  me  to  empty  my  pockets.  I  entered 
another  protest;  but  putting  his  pistol  to  my  head,  and 
crowding  his  horse  against  me,  he  thrust  a  hand  into  each 
of  my  wide  jacket-pockets,  getting  a  watch  from  one,  and 
nothing  from  the  other.  Meanwhile,  putting  my  hands 
behind  me,  and  drawing  a  diamond  ring  from  the  little 
finger  of  my  left  hand,  by  a  careless  movement  I  put  it  into 


48  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

my  mouth.  He  examined  me  closely,  and,  finding  nothing 
more  of  value,  directed  three  soldiers  who  were  looking  on  to 
take  me  to  the  rear.  Then  he  happened  to  observe  that 
I  had  not  given  up  my  sword  ;  and,  demanding  and  receiving 
this,  he  rode  off,  taking  with  my  other  property  a  few 
curses,  not  loud,  but  deep.  They  were  of  consolation  to  me, 
even  if  they  were  of  no  harm  to  him.  I  inquired  of  the 
men  who  he  was;  and  they  answered,  "Gen.  Early's 
courier,  and  part  or  whole  Injun." 

A  little  farther  to  the  rear,  we  came  upon  a  Rebel  line 
posted  behind  a  stone  wall ;  and  seeing  a  mounted  officer, 
who  looked  very  important,  I  went  up  to  bun,  and  com- 
plained of  my  treatment.  He  replied  that  he  couldn't  help 
it,  and  that  our  men  did  the  same.  I  disputed  this  rather  ■ 
warmly,  and  he  was  getting  the  worst  of  the  argument,  when 
he  rode  away.  I  sat  under  the  wall  for  some  time,  talking 
to  the  Kebels ;  but  at  last  an  officer  came  along,  and  ordered 
me  to  be  taken  to  the  provost-guard. 

On  the  way,  we  passed  a  Rebel  standing  guard  over  one  of 
our  officers,  —  a  staff-officer  of  the  Fourteenth  New-Hamp- 
shire. He  was  lying  in  a  stone  hole,  his  arm  broken  by  a 
Minie-ball.  I  paused  to  ask  his  name  and  the  address  of 
his  family,  and  then  went  on,  but  had  gone  only  a  few  steps 


A    PRISONER.  49 

when  one  of  my  guard  had  his  ankle  knocked  to  pieces  by  a 
musket-ball.  This  put  the  others  very  much  in  a  hurry;  and 
we  soon  reached  the  guard,  where  were  about  twenty  men 
and  two  officers  of  my  regiment,  and  about  forty  or  fifty 
of  various  other  regiments,  but  nearly  all  of  my  brigade. 
Quite  a  number  of  them  were  wounded  ;  one  of  the  officers, 
Lieutenant  Marshall,  being  shot  through  the  neck,  and  suf- 
fering intensely.  I  had  a  number  of  invitations  to  give  up 
my  haversack  and  canteau,  which  I  had  picked  up  and 
brought  along ;  but  I  clung  to  them,  and  they  were  of  great 
service  to  me  afterwards. 

While  this  was  going  on,  a  slight  lull  occurred  in  the 
battle ;  but  now  it  began  again  furiously,  and  the  Rebels 
seemed  to  be  having  the  worst  of  it.  Their  ambulances 
were  continually  coming  to  the  rear  filled  with  wounded, 
and  the  guard  kept  moving  us  a  little  farther  and  farther 
off;  but  still  the  shell  would  fly  over  us,  and  the  l^Iinie-balls 
keep  scattering  all  about.  The  Rebels  soon  showed  signs 
of  running ;  and  a  great  many  stragglers  fell  away  from 
the  ranks,  looking  back  with  frightened  glances.  Then  all 
at  once,  off  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  Rebel  line,  a  long 
black  line  of  horsemen  dashed  out  of  a  wood  ;  and  starting 
up  in  front  of  them,  scarcely  waiting  to  exchange  a  shot, 

4 


60  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE 

but  breaking  to  the  rear  in  utter  panic,  I  saw  the  Rebel 
cavalry.  The  infantry,  already  wavering,  could  stand  no 
longer ;  and  a  scene  of  panic  and  confusion,  from  its  very 
confusion  hard  to  describe,  followed.  We  were  driven  along 
on  a  run  ;  the  wounded,  who  could  not  be  beaten  forward, 
being  left  behind.  Some  of  the  Rebel  officers  begged  and 
prayed  of  then-  men  to  stand  ;  but  it  was  of  no  avail :  they 
were  thoroughly  demoralized. 

We  passed  Winchester  about  half  a  mile  to  the  right,  and 
between  the  town  and  our  troops,  who  were  shelling  us  vig- 
orously. Quite  a  number  of  Rebels  were  killed  all  about  us ; 
but  none  of  the  prisoners  were  hurt. 

A  little  beyond,  a  squad  of  cavalry  halted  our  party,  and 
robbed  such  of  us  as  seemed  to  have  any  thing  worth  tak- 
ing. One  asked  me  for  my  pocket-book,  and  I  was  very 
happy  to  inform  him  it  was  on  the  wagon-train.  He  was 
about  to  take  my  cap ;  but  I  moved  out  of  his  way,  and 
notified  the  provost-officer  of  what  was  going  on.  The  officer 
tried  to  induce  the  cavalry  tp  give  up  what  they  had  taken, 
and  threatened  to  use  force  if  they  did  not  ;  but  the  horse- 
men challenged  him  to  fight,  and  being  of  about  equal 
numbers,  and  better  armed,  got  off"  with  their  booty. 

At  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we   came   to  a  point 


A   PRISONER.  51 

about  two  miles  soutli  of  Winchester,  where  all  the  Union 
prisoners,  about  three  hundred  in  uumber,  were  gathered ; 
and  soon  afterwards  went  through  Newtown,  jMiddletown, 
Strasburg,  and  one  or  two  other  small  towns,  and  passed 
Fisher's  Hill,  which  the  Rebels  boasted  they  could  never 
be  driven  from.  All  the  way,  I  kept  trying  to  escape ;  but 
the  guards  were  very  vigilant,  and,  every  time  I  made  an 
attempt,  would  order  me  back  into  the  ranks,  and  warn  me 
not  to  try  again.  Finally  we  stopped  at  a  wood  called 
Tom's  Run,  and  there  lay  down  on  the  ground  utterly 
exhausted. 

September  twentieth.— We  had  as  yet  had  nothing  to 
eat ;  but  in  the  afternoon  of  this  day  some  flour  and  fresh 
beef  was  served  to  us,  and  it  refreshed  us  greatly.  Occa- 
sional firing  could  be  heard  in  the  direction  of  Fisher's 
Hill,  which  now  was  about  two  miles  away. 

September  twenty-first.  —  Having  no  blanket,  I  was  very 
cold  during  the  night.  We  drew  our  rations  in  flour  and 
beef,  and  exchanged  them  at  a  house  near  by  for  two  good 
meals,  which  were  very  acceptable.  The  family  were  good 
Union  people,  as  were  also  another  family  living  a  little 
farther  up  the  road  :  in  fact,  the  head  of  the  latter  was  in 
our  army. 


52  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

September  twenty-second.  —  Heavy  firing  was  heard  dur- 
ing the  day  in  the  direction  of  Fisher's  Hill ;  and  two  prison- 
ers were  added  to  our  number,  who  told  us  that  our  forces 
were  making  a  determined  attack  on  the  Rebel  fortifications. 
There  was  a  lull  in  the  afternoon,  and  we  were  lying  littered 
about  on  the  ground,  when  one  of  the  officers  announced  that 
two  men  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa  were  about  to  give  an 
entertainment.  Sure  enough,  they  were.  Suddenly,  as  if 
dropped  from  the  clouds,  two  athletic  fellows  appeared  among 
us,  dressed  in  flesh-colored  tights,  one  with  crimson,  and  the 
other  with  blue  silk  breeches,  covered  with  gold  stars,  and 
elongated  with  silver-spangled  slippers.  Spreading  a  blanket 
on  the  grass,  they  commenced  a  series  of  very  creditable  per- 
formances ;  and  a  large  crowd  of  Rebels  gathered  round, 
expressing  great  admiration  and  wonder. 

All  this  day,  squads  and  companies  of  men  had  been 
going  to  the  front,  and  also  wagon-loads  of  muskets  ;  but,  at 
four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  there  came  a  number  of  wagons 
and  soldiers  down  the  road  in  what  seemed  very  much  like 
haste  and  disorder.  The  officers  of  our  guard  did  not  at 
first  know  what  to  make  of  it ;  but  they  soon  learned,  and 
ordered  us  to  fall  in  double  -  quick,  and  the  guard  to 
shoot  any  man  who  loitered.     The  road  was  soon  a  mass  of 


A   PRISONER.  53 

wagons  and  disorganized  soldiers,  rushing  along  in  the 
wildest  confusion.  We  were  started  up  the  valley,  but 
had  not  gone  far  when  a  cry  arose  that  our  cavalry  were 
flanking  the  Rebels  in  the  gap  below.  We  were  then 
started  back  toward  Fisher's  Hill,  and  pressed  on  to  about 
half  a  mile  beyond  our  camp  of  the  morning.  There  we 
had  to  breast  the  retreating  Rebels  as  a  rock  breasts  a  wave. 
We  had  not  gone  far,  however,  before  our  guard  conceived  a 
new  idea,  and  ordered  us  to  about-face,  and  start  on  the 
back-track  again. 

September  twenty-third. — We  marched  all  that  night, 
and,  the  next  forenoon,  arrived  in  the  midst  of  a  heavy  rain 
at  the  town  of  Newmarket.  Lurid  fires  were  blazing  behind 
us  all  night,  suggesting  burning  trains  and  bridges;  and 
scattered  all  along  the  road  were  broken  and  upset  wagons 
and  ambulances.  The  ground  was  white  with  flour ;  and 
occasionally  we  stumbled  over  quantities  of  fresh  beef,  grown 
shapeless  under  the  tread  of  many  feet. 

September  twenty  -  fourth.  —  At  Newmarket  we  were 
quartered  in  an  old  church,  and  supplied  with  flour  and 
bacon ;  and  in  the  afternoon  I  went  out,  accompanied  by  a 
guard,  and  famished  with  about  twenty  dollars  of  Confed- 
erate   money,   to  replenish   our  stock  of  provisions.     One 


54  ADEIFT  IX  DIXIE. 

young  woman  asked  me  all  about  myself,  and  would  take  no 
pay  for  what  I  bought ;  and  an  old  lady  also,  just  across  the 
street,  would  accept  of  nothing,  but  gave  me  all  she  could 
spare  from  her  scanty  stores.  I  saw  a  good  many  Union 
families  in  the  valley;  but  they  were  afraid  to  openly  ex- 
press theii'  sentiments. 

September  twenty-fifth.  — TVe  remained  in  the  church  all 
night,  and  part  of  the  next  day,  dui'ing  which  heavy  firing 
continued  down  the  valley.  About  three  in  the  afternoon, 
we  saw  signs  of  another  stampede  among  the  Rebels.  We 
were  aojain  ordered  to  fall  in,  and  soon  afterward  started 
southward,  and,  marching  all  night,  arrived  within  eight 
miles  of  Staunton  at  sumise.  Each  man  was  here  given  a 
half-loaf  of  soft  bread  ;  and,  after  resting  a  while,  we  again 
started  for  Staunton. 

That  night  I  tried  several  times  to  get  away;  but  the 
guard  seemed  to  look  out  for  me  particularly.  A  sergeant 
of  the  Hundred  and  Thirty-first  New- York  proposed  to 
escape  with  me ;  and  we  made  the  attempt,  but  came  very 
near  being  shot,  and  indeed  would  have  been,  had  not  one 
or  two  of  our  comrades  jostled  the  guard  while  we  sprang 
into  the  ranks  again,  where,  owing  to  the  darkness,  we  could 
not  be  distinguished.    Afterwards  I  concluded  to  spring  from 


A  PRISONER.  55 

a  bridge  into  the  river ;  but,  when  just  ready  to  make  the 
leap,  two  of  the  guard  ranged  themselves  along  by  my  side, 
and  I  had  to  relinquish  the  attempt.  At  every  piece  of 
woods  we  passed,  a  perfect  fever  of  escape  would  come 
over  me ;  but  it  was  well  I  did  not  try.  Cavalry  skirmish- 
ers rode  all  along  the  flanks  of  the  column ;  and,  being  some 
distance  away,  I  might  have  gone  right  among  them :  besides, 
every  piece  of  woods  was  filled  with  disorganized  Rebel  caval- 
ry, who,  having  run  until  they  were  tired,  had  halted,  and 
made  little  bivouacs  among  the  trees. 

We  amved  at  Staunton  about  noon,  and  five  crackers 
were  given  to  each  one  of  us  for  his  dinner.  After  waiting 
there  two  hours,  and  being  put  on  and  off  the  train  again 
and  again  according  to  the  whim  of  the  different  Rebel  offi- 
cers, we  finally  started,  the  piisoners  on  the  roof,  and  the 
Rebels  inside,  of  a  train  of  freight-cars.  After  twelve  miles 
of  rough  travel,  we  anived  at  Waynesborough,  where  we  went 
into  camp  on  a  piece  of  gravelly  gi'ound  between  two  small 
streams.  Here  we  bathed  and  rested  ourselves  as  well  as  we 
could,  and,  gathering  some  scraps  of  wood,  builded  a  fii-e. 
Our  guard  would  not  allow  us  to  gather  any,  except  such 
few  chips  as  had  drifted  on  the  gravel  where  we  were  en- 
camped ;  and  that  night  we  were  very  cold. 


66  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

.  September  twenty  -  sixth.  —  Before  daybreak  tbe  next 
morning,  we  started  westward  to  cross  the  Blue  Kidge,  and, 
arriving  at  the  summit  about  sunrise,  saw  a  glorious  \4ew 
spread  out  before  us.  It  was  both  grand  and  beautiful, 
and  every  thing  seemed  to  combine  to  make  it  so.  I  lin- 
gered and  looked  until  I  exhausted  the  patience  of  the  guard, 
and  was  ordered  to  start  on  down  the  mountain.  We  had 
eaten  nothing  since  noon  of  the  previous  day,  and  not  enough 
then,  and  had  become  very  hungry.  The  officer  of  the  guard 
told  us  that  provisions  were  behind  in  a  wagon,  and  that 
we  should  receive  some  after  going  a  little  farther ;  but  we 
marched  twenty  miles  farther,  and  received  none.  There 
probably  was  none  in  the  wagons  :  it  was  only  a  ruse  of  the 
officer  to  get  us  forward.  Some  of  the  men  sank  down  in 
the  road,  utterly  exhausted ;  but  I  bore  up  well,  and  my 
feet  were  sound,  while  those  of  many  others  were  a  perfect 
pulp  of  blister. 

At  length  we  arrived  at  Meacham-River  Depot,  and  were 
told  again  that  we  should  certainly  have  food  given  us,  but, 
after  waiting  a  while,  were  put  upon  platform-cars,  such  as 
wood  is  carried  on,  and  started  toward  Richmond  without 
any.  We  arrived  at  Charlottesville  at  dark,  and  again  were 
told  that  our  fast  should  be  broken,  but,  after  waiting  an 


A  PRISONER.  57 

hour  or  more,  —  lonp;  enouo;li  for  some  of  the  officers  of  the 
guard  to  get  comfortably  intoxicated, — were  started  on  again 
hungiy.  The  cars  were  much  crowded,  and  no  sleep  visited 
our  eyes  that  night.  It  was  very  cold  too,  and  the  chill  wind 
struck  through  to  our  bones  as  we  rode  swiftly  on  against  it. 

September  twenty-seventh.  —  Early  in  the  morning  we 
arrived  in  Richmond,  and  were  marched  dkectly  from  the 
cars  to  the  Libby  Prison,  having  quite  a  view  of  the  city  on 
the  way.  We  were  insulted  by  a  few  persons;  but  most 
of  the  people  contented  themselves  with  staring  at  us,  as  if 
they  knew  we  had  whipped  them  well,  and  were,  therefore, 
not  disposed  to  glory  in  our  misfortunes. 

When  we  reached  the  prison,  the  officers  were  separated 
from  the  men,  and  marched  into  a  gloomy  passage-way,  and 
then  one  at  a  time  taken  into  an  office,  where  our  names, 
regiment,  company,  and  residence  at  time  of  enlistment, 
were  taken  down.  Then  we  were  taken  into  another  room, 
and  thoroughly  searched.  We  were  told,  that,  if  we  gave 
up  our  money,  it  would  be  kept  account  of,  and  returned 
to  us  on  our  removal ;  but  if  we  did  not  give  it  up,  and  it 
was  found,  it  would  be  confiscated :  so  far  as  I  know,  no 
money  was  ever  returned.  Our  haversacks,  canteens,  blan- 
kets, and  such  papers  as  were  considered  contraband,  were 


58  ADRIFT  IX  DIXIE. 

also  taken  from  us.  We  were  then  marched  up  stairs,  and 
put  into  a  room  with  many  other  officers,  the  most  of  whom 
belonged  to  the  second  corps  and  were  captured  at  Eeim's 
Station.  They  were  all  very  eager  to  hear  about  the  battle, 
and  we  gave  them  all  the  news  we  could. 

"We  were  nearly  famished,  but  were  given  nothing  to  eat 
until  the  middle  of  the  afternoon,  when  about  half  a  pint  of 
black  bean-soup,  and  a  junk  of  bread  of  about  the  size  and 
shape  of  a  man's  fist,  veiy  sour  and  tough,  were  served  out 
to  us.  That  nio;ht  we  huddled  toojether,  and  managed  to  ^et 
a  little  sleep,  although  it  was  very  cold,  and  the  floor  was 
hard  and  uncomfortable.  The  officers  were  kept  in  the 
upper  and  next  to  the  upper  story.  Both  stories  were 
pierced  with  many  windows ;  but  there  was  no  glass,  nor  any 
thing  but  a  few  ru3ty  ii'on  bars,  to  keep  out  the  cold  wind. 
We  had  a  veiy  good  view  of  Richmond  from  the  upper  win- 
dows. The  Capitol  Building,  Castle  Thunder,  the  James 
Kiver  and  the  bridge  across  it,  a  monster  flouring-mill,  the 
higher  part  of  Belle  Isle,  the  great  Government  Foundry, 
and  a  number  of  other  noted  places,  were  all  in  plain  view. 

September  twenty-eighth.  —  We  had  for  breakfast  a  piece 
of  bread  of  the  same  size  and  quality  as  before,  and  a  small 
piece  of  l>eef ;  and  for  dinner  the  same  food  as  yesterday. 


A  PRISONER.  59 

After  dinner,  there  was  a  roll-call ;  and  all  fell  in,  in  four 
ranks,  down  stairs,  to  the  music  of  two  fifes,  a  kettle,  and  a 
bass-drum,  played  by  some  of  our  boys  who  had  been  cap- 
tured. The  music  was  very  good  and  inspiriting,  and  we 
were  reluctant  to  go  up  stairs  again.  We  were  supplied  with 
good  water,  but  with  not  quite  enough  of  it.  It  was  brouo-ht 
up  in  a  leaden  pipe,  with  faucets,  but  did  not  run  all  of 
the  time ;  and  there  was  no  soap.  We  were  told  we  might 
buy  bread  at  a  dollar  a  loaf;  and  such  of  the  officers  as  had 
Confederate  money  bought,  and  divided  it  among  the  mess. 
We  were  divided  into  messes  of  thirteen,  and  drew  our 
rations,  except  the  beans,  in  gross,  and  then  divided  them. 
We  had  to  mai-eh  down  stairs  to  get  the  beans ;  and  such 
of  the  prisoners  as  had  no  dishes  had  to  go  without  the  soup, 
and  take  the  beans  in  their  hands.  Most  of  them  had  dishes, 
however,  or  soon  procured  them  from  others. 

I  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  number  of  officers,  and  the 
time  passed  away  quite  agi-eeably.  We  walked  about  the 
room  a  great  deal,  usually  keepmg  thue,  and  in  four  ranks, 
but  had  to  be  carefal  about  going  to  the  windows ;  the  onards 
having  orders  to  shoot  any  one  looking  out.  We  could, 
however,  by  keeping  an  eye  on  the  sentinels,  and  drawino- 


60  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

back  when  tlicy  turned  towards  us,  get  stray  glimpses  of 
the  outside  world. 

September  twenty-ninth.  —  The  day  passed  the  same  as 
yesterday,  except  that  in  the  afternoon  a  great  battle  was 
fought  down  the  James,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  We 
could  see  shells  bursting,  and  clouds  of  smoke  rolling  up 
from  the  musketry-fire,  and  were  somewhat  excited  at 
the  tremendous  roar  of  the  conflict.  The  people  in  Rich- 
mond appeared  panic-stricken,  and  ran  about  the  streets  like 
lost  chickens.  At  night  the  tumult  died  away ;  but,  all  the 
afternoon,  wounded  men  came  straggling  into  town,  and  all 
the  night  large  bodies  of  troops  were  moving  out  to  the 
place  of  attack. 

September  thirtieth.  —  Our  food  this  day  was  the  same  as 
the  day  before.  We  saw  re-enforcements  going  to  the  scene 
of  battle  in  large  numbers ;  and  in  the  forenoon  a  few  pris- 
oners were  brought  in,  who  told  us  that  our  forces  had  taken 
Fort  Harrison.  In  the  afternoon  there  was  another  very 
fierce  fight,  which,  for  a  time,  kept  us  in  great  suspense. 
We  organized  into  squads  under  colonels,  the  whole  under 
command  of  General  Hayes  of  the  second  corps ;  so  that,  in 
case  the  city  should  be  taken,  we  could  co-operate  with  our 


A  rmsoxEE.  61 

forces.  This  last  battle  closed  about  sunset ;  and  we  heard 
afterwards  that  it  was  an  unsuccessful  Rebel  attempt  to  retake 
Fort  Harrison. 

October  second.  —  At  about  two  or  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  we  heard  a  banging  noise  in  the  room  below ;  and 
some  of  the  old  residents  said  it  was  the  stairs  being  hauled 
into  place,  —  they  were  taken  down  every  night,  —  and  that 
"  something  was  up;  "  and,  sure  enough,  soon  afterwards  we 
were  ordered  to  fall  in  immediately,  and  to  leave  all  blankets 
behind.  I  concealed  mine  by  wrapping  it  about  me,  and 
buttoning  my  jacket  and  trousers  over  it,  the  garments  not 
fitting  as  tightly  as  they  did  before  my  capture. 

We  were  soon  taken  down  stairs,  and  furnished  with  a 
haversack,  containing  what  was  called  three-days'  rations ; 
though  I  had  to  exercise  great  self-denial  to  refrain  from  eat- 
ing them  ail  in  one  day.  We  then  formed  in  the  street  in 
four  ranks,  with  guards  all  around  us,  and  marched  off 
in  the  dark,  crossing  the  James  on  the  lower  or  road  bridge. 
I  was  strongly  inclined  to  jump  off  into  the  river,  and  escape 
by  swimming ;  but  the  roaring  of  the  water  told  that  it  was 
very  rocky,  and  I  did  not  dare  to  make  the  attempt,  al- 
though I  was  quivering  with  jump  all  over. 

Soon  after  crossing  the  river,  we  came  to  a  train  of  box 


62  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

freight-cars,  and  were  put  into  them,  about  fifty  into  each, 
two  guards  at  each  door,  and  the  top  of  each  car  covered 
with  them.  The  ends  of  the  cars  were  very  dark,  and  so 
close  that  we  could  scarcely  breathe  ;  and  some  of  the  men 
crowded  into  the  doors,  thus  making  bad  worse.  The  air 
finally  grew  so  stifling,  that  I  determined  to  cut  a  hole 
through  the  car ;  and  after  an  hour  of  hard  carving  with  a 
dull  knife,  keeping  one  eye  on  the  guard,  I  made  an 
aperture  about  two  inches  long  and  one  inch  wide,  which 
improved  the  atmosphere,  and  enabled  us  to  see  a  little  of 
the  outside  world.  It  was  back  of  a  brace,  and  the  guard 
did  not  detect  the  opening. 

At  night,  while  we  went  the  distance  of  about  ten  miles, 
all  the  doors  were  closed  on  one  side  of  the  train ;  and  we 
concluded  we  were  passing  something  the  Rebels  did  not  wish 
us  to  see.  About  an  hour  after  dark,  the  train  stopped ;  and 
we  were  allowed  to  encamp  in  a  little  piece  of  woods  near  the 
track,  the  wood  and  the  train  being  very  closely  encircled  by 
guards,  —  so  closely  indeed,  that,  though  I  went  all  around 
the  lines,  I  could  see  no  chance  to  get  through.  I  lost  my 
single  piece  of  bread  on  my  rounds ;  but  an  officer  found  it, 
and  gave  it  to  me  again. 


CHAPTER    IL 


ESCAPE. 


WE  were  put  aboard  the  train  at  daybreak,  and 
started  for  Danville.  The  hole  I  had  cut  in  the 
car  proved  very  useful  as  well  as  pleasant.  After  we  had 
gone  some  way,  I  saw  a  river  running  side  by  side  with  the 
raiboad,  though  somewhat  more  crooked,  and,  inquiring  of 
two  or  three  Tennessee  guerilla  (Union)  officers,  was  told 
it  was  the  Dan.  I  almost  persuaded  these  officers  to 
attempt  to  get  away  with  me.  They  said  they  would,  but 
did  not  seem  inchned  to  start  when  I  proposed  to  go  :  so  I 
set  out  without  them.  I  wanted  them  as  companions,  be- 
cause they  knew  the  country  thoroughly ;  one  of  them  having 
traded  cattle  all  through  that  region.  They  talked  of  getting 
back  by  the  way  of  Knoxville,  and  I  remembered  all  they 
said. 

We  kept  on  some  distance  by  the  side  of  the  river ;  and  I 
conceived  the  idea  of  getting  free  in  some  way  by  its  help, 
but  formed  no  definite  plan.     The  stream  was  muddy,  and 


64  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

ran  rapidly ;  and  along  its  shore  were  a  great  many  willows, 
some  of  them  stretching  far  over  and  into  the  water.  At 
about  half-past  eight,  a.m.,  we  arrived  at  a  place  called 
Barksdale  Depot,  about  ten  miles  from  Danville ;  and  there 
the  traui  stopped  on  a  turnout  to  wait  for  two  other  trains, 
and  to  procure  wood  and  water.  The  river  here  ran  about 
three  rods  from  the  raiboad ;  the  ground  sloping  gradually 
from  the  track  to  the  water,  where  was  a  perpendicular 
bank  of  five  or  six  feet,  with  scarcely  standing-room  at  the 
bottom. 

Ten  or  twelve  ojBScers  asked  permission  to  go  down  to  the 
river  to  wash  their  hands  and  faces,  and  it  was  granted ;  and 
they  started,  accompanied  by  half  a  dozen  guards.  When  I 
first  heard  the  application,  I  determined  to  be  one  of  the 
party,  and  to  improve  any  opportunity  there  might  be  of 
escaping.  Taking  my  knife  and  the  small  piece  of  bread 
left  from  my  three-days'  rations,  I  went  with  the  rest,  passing 
a  little  to  the  right  of  them,  and  farther  up  the  river.  By 
stooping  low,  I  could  get  out  of  sight  of  the  guard,  as  they 
did  not  stand  directly  on  the  edge  of  the  bank.  I  sat  down 
and  bathed  my  hands  and  face,  being  tolerably  long  about  it, 
and,  when  it  seemed  about  time  to  return,  looked  up  through 
the  weeds,  and  concluded,  from  the  behavior  of  the  guard, 


ESCAPE.  65 

tbat  they  had  not  counted  us,  and  had  no  idea  of  any  one 
getting  away. 

Some  of  the  officers  had  then  gone  back  to  tlie  train. 
"Now,  or  never,"  I  thought  to  myself,  as  I  looked  at  the 
river,  my  heart  beating  heavily.  Near  to  me  was  a  small 
willow,  with  a  large  spreading  stump,  and  roots  partly 
covered  with  drift-wood ;  and  the  river,  gliding  swiftly  by, 
made  its  long  trailing  branches  bow  and  sway  in  the  rippling 
current.  With  a  fervent  but  short  prayer,  I  made  up  my 
mind  to  "  liberty  or  death."  At  first  I  decided  to  swim  off 
under  water ;  but,  not  being  sure  I  could  do  so  without 
making  a  splashing,  I  determined  to  immerse  all  but  my 
face,  and,  crawling  under  the  roots  of  the  willow-tree,  to 
take  to  swimming  as  a  last  resort :  for,  once  in  the  water,  it 
would  be  sure  death  to  be  seen  by  the  guards.  Taking  a 
long  look  of  every  thing  about  me,  not  knowing  but  it  might 
be  my  last,  I  thought  of  my  friends  at  home,  said  another 
short  prayer,  drew  a  long  breath,  and  then  slid  off  into  the 
river. 

The  icy  water  struck  coldly  through  my  clothes,  and  made 
me  shiver ;  but  I  did  not  mind  it.  I  got  under  the  drift 
stuff,  keeping  just  enough  of  my  face  out  to  breathe,  and 
then  daubed  my  cap  with  the  clayey  mud,  and  put  it  on  to 


66  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

keep  my  black  hair  from  sbowing.  I  had  scarcely  done 
this  when  I  heard  the  order,  "All  those  Yanks  that  are 
down  thar  washin',  come  up  ! "  The  other  officers  who  had 
not  already  gone  scrambled  up  the  bank,  and  returned  to 
the  cars. 

But  as  yet  there  were  no  sounds  of  the  coming  trains. 
Soon  I  heard  some  one  at  the  cars,  in  a  voice  of  authority, 
ask,  "  Are  you  sure  all  those  Yanks  came  up?"  —  "Yes, 
we  reckons  they  has." —  "Go  down  and  see ! "  said  the  voice 
again ;  and  soon  three  or  four  sauntered  along  -the  bank. 
They  did  not  see  me,  and  returned  satisfied  to  the  train ; 
and,  my  place  in  the  cars  being  a  dark  corner,  the  guard 
had  not  discovered  my  absence.  But  still  the  trains  did  not 
come.  I  was  chilled  through  and  through  by  the  cold 
mountain-water ;  but  I  cared  little  for  the  cold :  I  thought 
only  of  the  train.     Would  it  ever  go  ? 

I  had  to  keep  very  quiet,  because  a  ferry  crossed  the 
river  just  above,  and  several  white  men  had  come  to  the 
bank,  and  recently  crossed  over.  After  a  time,  which 
seemed  an  age,  though  it  was  really  only  twenty  minutes,  I 
heard  the  rumble  of  cars  in  the  distance.  It  was  a  pleasant 
sound,  and  grew  louder  and  pleasanter  very  fast ;  and  soon 
the  train  arrived,  and  stopped  at  the  depot ;  and,  about  the 


ESCAPE.  67 

same  time,  I  heard  the  other  train  coming  from  Richmond. 
It  also  soon  arrived ;  and  after  a  deal  of  switching  backward 
and  forward,  blowing  of  whistles,  ringing  of  bells,  and 
shouting  of  men,  all  the  trains  got  under  way.  As  the  one 
in  which  I  had  come  went  by,  I  heard  the  prisoners  give  a 
loud  cheer,  and  thought  it  was  for  my  escape,  as  they 
would  instantly  detect  my  absence,  even  if  the  guard  did 
not. 

Waiting  until  every  thing  was  cjuiet,  I  ci-ept  out  of  the 
river,  and  crawled  among  the  weeds  for  the  water  to  drip 
from  my  clothing,  and  also  for  a  boat  to  pass  which  was 
then  coming  up  the  river.  When  the  boat  had  passed,  I  set 
out  for  a  piece  of  woods  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  down  the 
stream,  taking  off  my  jacket,  that  its  showy  dark-blue  might 
not  be  seen  from  the  depot,  which  was  dangerously  near. 
Wrapping  my  cap  in  my  jacket,  the  gray  lining  of  the  jacket 
turned  outwards,  I  set  out,  dragging  myself  along  on  my 
stomach,  pushing  my  bundle  before  me,  and  making  as  little 
iTistling  among  the  weeds  as  possible. 

Reaching  the  wood  at  last,  I  took  off  my  pants,  wringing 
the  water  from  them,  and  scraping  the  mud  off  as  well  as  I 
could.     I  was  very  hungry,  but  had  eaten  my  bread  while 


68  ADEIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

in  the  river,  being  determined  to  enjoy  all  the  good  things 
of  this  world  while  they  lasted. 

As  soon  as  my  clothes  were  a  little  righted,  I  started  to  go 
back  fi'om  the  river,  and,  watching  my  opportunity,  crossed 
the  raUroad  without  being  seen,  and  then,  keeping  on  in  a 
north-westerly  direction,  and  going  about  half  a  mile,  came 
to  another  wood,  near  winch  was  a  house  and  outbuildings. 
I  was  anxious  to  look  off  into  the  country,  but  could  find  no 
elevated  ground,  and  decided  to  hide  away  for  the  day,  and 
at  night  go  down  to  the  depot,  where  there  was  probably  a 
road  leading  into  the  country.  My  intention  was  to  make 
my  way  westward  to  the  AUeghanies,  and  over  them  to 
Knoxville,  Tennessee,  according  to  the  jjrogramme  of  the 
officers  I  had  conversed  with  on  the  cars. 

The  depot  was  still  in  sight;  and  I  went  as  near  to  it 
as  possible,  and  waited  there  for  the  darkness.  I  went  on 
until  I  came  to  the  edge  of  the  wood,  and  then  hid  in  a 
little  ravine  formed  by  a  rivulet  which  ran  under  the  rail- 
road and  into  the  river.  It  was  then  about  noon,  and  had 
begun  to  rain ;  but  I  was  already  wet  through,  and  all  of  a 
shiver.  I  was  hungry  too  ;  for  though  I  had  gathered  sassa- 
fras-leaves, and  found  a  little  apple  in  the  brook,  they  did 
not  satisfy  my  appetite. 


ESCAPE.  69 

The  day  came  to  an  end  at  last;  but  it  was  a  long  day  of 
patient  waiting.  When  it  was  quite  dark,  I  started  for  the 
depot.  It  was  still  raining,  but  not  heavily.  I  reached  the 
station  in  safety,  although  a  man  passed  within  arm's-length 
of  me  as  I  lay  hidden  in  a  clump  of  bushes  by  the  side  of 
the  road.  A  number  of  men  were  lounging  about  the  sta- 
tion, but  none  of  them  saw  me ;  and  I  soon  came  to  a  high- 
road, as  I  had  expected,  or  rather  to  half  a  dozen  of  them, 
forking  in  all  directions.  I  chose  one,  and,  following  it  a  short 
distance,  came  to  a  brook  which  had  to  be  forded,  and,  keep- 
ing on  a  httle  farther,  reached  a  gate  wliich  blocked  up  my 
farther  progress.  This  did  not  look  much  like  a  highway ; 
but  I  determined  to  keep  on,  and  find  some  negro  who  could 
give  me  information.  Scouting  along,  I  soon  stumbled  upon 
the  railroad  again,  and,  following  it  a  short  distance,  saw 
something  of  a  clayey-white  color  alongside,  and  below  the 
track.  A  stone  I  tossed  down  struck  with  a  dull  sound,  as 
if  on  plank  covered  with  dirt ;  and  concluding  it  was  a  plank- 
road,  and  that  I  should  not  be  so  likely  to  meet  soldiers  on 
it  as  on  the  railroad,  I  scrambled  down  to  it,  and  walked  ra- 
pidly forward. 

It  soon  began  to  rain  again,  and  became  very  dark.     With 
nothing  whatever  to  show  the  way,  I  soon  concluded  the 


70  ADRIFT  TN  DIXIE. 

plank-road  was  a  humbug;  for  it  grew  narrower  and  nar- 
rower, witb  numerous  paths  diverging  from  it,  and  at 
kst  ended  in  a  path  itself.  There  I  found  some  sugar- 
cane, which  was  very  palatable.  I  struck  then  through  a 
tobacco-field,  and  into  a  corn-field,  gathering  a  pocketful 
of  corn,  not  very  hard,  and  very  acceptable.  Scouting 
along  a  fence,  I  soon  caught  sight  of  a  gloomy-looking  build- 
ing just  to  my  left,  and,  going  very  closely  to  it,  found  it  to 
be  a  high  log  affair,  with  no  apparent  doors  or  windows. 
On  its  farther  side,  however,  very  low  down,  was  an  opening, 
through  which  a  ruddy  light  was  streaming.  I  thought  it 
might  be  a  blacksmith -shop.;  but  creeping  noiselessly  up  to 
the  door,  and  looking  in,  I  saw  I  was  mistaken.  A  glowing 
fire  was  burning  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  beside  it 
lay  an  old  negro  sleeping.  Seeing  no  one  else,  I  decided 
to  cultivate  the  old  man's  acquaintance. 

Going  quietly  in  by  the  partly  open  door,  I  sat  down  by 
the  fire,  the  negro  still  sleeping  soundly.  I  warmed  my- 
self, and  partly  dried  my  clothes,  scraping  off  some  of  the 
mud,  and,  sitting  about  ten  minutes,  reached  over,  and  shook 
the  old  man  by  the  shoulder,  telling  him  to  wake  up,  — 
as  wide  awake  as  possible.  He  opened  his  eyes,  and  stared 
at  m£  for  a  while  with  a  stupid,  frightened  look,  but,  on  my 


ESCAPE.  71 

asking  if  he  was  wide  awake,  said,  "  Sartin,  massa."  I  then 
told  him  I  was  a  Yankee. 

"  Gofry-mitey,  massa!  is  you  a  Yankee?"  he  cried,  his 
eyes  opening  wide  with  astonishment.  I  soon  convinced  him  I 
was ;  and  ho  opened  his  heart,  telling  me  all  his  grievances, 
— stopping  frequently  to  express  his  astonishment  at  seeing 
a  live  Yankee,  and  his  regret  at  having  nothing  for  me  to 
eat.  He  was  very  anxious  to  get  me  some  food,  and  a  knife 
also  in  place  of  mine,  which  he  said  "  was  no  'count." 

I  inquired  the  way  to  Knoxville ;  but  he  did  not  know 
where  it,  or  Tennessee,  or  the  Alleghanies  were,  but  thought 
his  son-in-law,  who  could  read  and  write,  would  be  able  to 
tell  me.  The  son-in-law  could  also  give  me  food,  and  a 
change  of  clothes  in  place  of  my  Federal  blue.  The  old 
man  gave  me  directions  how  to  find  him,  as  well  as  he  could ; 
but,  bemg  very  old,  his  mind  was  vague  and  wandering. 
However,  he  was  sure  it  was  only  seven  miles  away ;  and 
one  point  on  the  road  was  impressed  on  his  mind  particularly, 
—  Sandy  Creek,  and  the  church  on  the  hill  just  this  side  of 
it.  These  were  almost  the  only  set  landmarks  he  could 
think  of. 

After  warming  myself  thoroughly,  I  set  out;  the  old  man 
going  a  short   distance  to    start   me   right.      Although   he 


72  ADIUFT  IN  DIXIE. 

was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  he  directed  me  as  well  as  he  could 
to  the  road,  and,  pointing  out  a  star  —  one  of  the  very  few 
showing  themselves  in  the  rents  in  the  clouds  —  as  my  guide 
for  the  rest  of  the  way,  wished  me  all  sorts  of  good  luck, 
and  we  parted.  His  name  was  Fairborne  ;  and  the  building 
in  which  I  found  him  was  a  dry-house  for  the  curing  of  to- 
bacco, called  in  those  parts  a  tobacco-barn.  The  country  is 
dotted  all  over  with  these  buildings,  some  plantations  having 
eight  or  ten  scattered  about  in  the  fields  :  they  are  all  alike, 
but  they  form  quite  a  feature  in  the  scenery. 

I  had  not  gone  far  before  the  heavens  grew  entirely  black ; 
but  I  kept  on  as  nearly  as  I  could  in  the  du-ection  the  old 
man  had  given.  The  road,  he  had  said,  was  a  "  lane-road  ;  " 
that  is,  fenced  in  :  and  at  last  I  came  to  one  which  I  thought 
answered  the  description.  My  spirits  grew  buoyant ;  and  I 
went  on  with  a  light  heart,  though  it  had  begun  to  rain  again, 
and  I  was  quite  hungry.  I  walked  some  two  or  three  miles, 
and  then  came  to  a  fork  in  the  road.  The  old  man  had 
told  me  not  to  turn  to  the  left,  as  the  left-hand  path  led  to 
the  river  :  so  I  kept  to  the  right,  and  travelled  on  and  on, 
crossing  one  broad  road,  and  coming  to  the  railway,  where  a 
high  bridge  carried  the  wagon-track  over  it.  I  knew  the  old 
man  would  have  spoken  of  it  if  it  had  been  on  my  route  : 


ESCAPE.  73 

SO  I  concluded  I  must  be  going  wrong,  and  went  back  until 
I  came  to  the  road  which  crossed  the  one  I  was  then  on,  and, 
turning  to  the  left,  went  about  two  miles,  when  it,  too,  be- 
gan to  grow  small,  and  beautifully  less.  Then  I  turned  back, 
and  into  the  other  road  again,  thinking  I  would  cross,  and 
keep  on  ;  but,  before  going  half  a  mile,  I  decided  to  turn 
back,  and  go  ail  the  way  back  to  the  forks,  and,  taking  the 
left-hand  road,  give  that  a  trial. 

A  few  dogs  made  a  great  noise  as  I  went  by  the  houses ; 
but  no  one  was  stirring ;  and,  after  a  while,  I  got  back  to 
where  I  had  started.  I  was  very  tired,  having  walked  about 
fifteen  miles.  The  rain,  too,  was  falling  m  torrents,  and  the 
mud  was  deep  and  heavy ;  and  owing  to  the  darkness,  the 
blinding  rain,  and  the  roughness  of  the  road,  I  had  stumbled 
continually,  and  fallen  headlong  several  times.  This  had 
greatly  exhausted  me ;  but  I  was  not  discouraged,  and,  after 
resting  a  while  at  the  fork,  started  again,  with  good  spirits, 
on  the  left-hand  road. 

I  had  gone  only  a  short  distance  on  this  road  before  it  be- 
came fully  as  bad  if  not  worse  than  the  others ;  and  utterly 
exhausted,  and  very  faint  from  hunger,  I  lay  down  on  some 
logs  by  the  roadside,  and,  spite  of  the  pouring  rain,  fell  into 
a  sound  sleep.     I  awoke  after  a  while,  and  feeling  somewhat 


74  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

stronger,  although  stiJfF  and  cold,  started  on  again.  Going 
about  five  miles  on  this  road,  I  saw  bright  lights  ahead,  and, 
keeping  on  still  farther,  came  among  some  buildings.  I  con- 
cluded it  was  near  morning,  and  the  people  were  milking. 
It  was  not  prudent  to  go  to  them,  for  the  overseer  might 
be  about ;  and  the  cock  too,  which  was  crowing,  warned  me 
to  look  about  for  a  hiding-place  for  the  coming  da3^  It  was, 
however,  imperatively  necessary  that  I  should  procure  food  ; 
and,  knowing  there  must  be  negro-cabins  on  the  plantation, 
I  tried  to  find  them.  Passing  a  number  of  buildings 
whose  appearance  warned  me  not  to  trust  them,  I  came  to 
a  double  cabin,  where  a  child  was  crying  most  lustily.  Paus- 
ing a  moment,  and  listening,  I  heard  a  voice,  unmistakably 
negro,  trying  to  hush  the  child.  This  decided  me  ;  and  I 
rapped  at  the  door  loudly.  No  answer  came,  and  soon  I 
rapped  again;  when  some  one  inside  called  out,  "Who's 
dar?" 

I  did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  tell,  the  other  houses  being  too 
near;  and  in  a  low  tone  asked  to  be  admitted. 

After  a  long  delay,  and  some  impatient  promptings  from 
me,  a  person  inside,  named  Willis,  was  roused  up,  and,  with 
repeated  urgings,  induced  to  open  the  door.  I  slipped  in, 
and  found  myself  in  a  perfect  nest  of  negroes  of  all  ages, 


ESCAPE.  75 

sick,  stupid,  and  with  notbing  to  eat.  It  was  a  sort  of  hos- 
pital and  nursery  combined,  where  sick  persons  and  very 
young  children  were  hived  while  their  parents  and  natural 
protectors  were  out  at  work.  I  saw  at  once  it  was  no  place 
for  me,  and  inquired  of  Willis  who  were  the  tenants  of  the 
other  part  of  the  cabin.  He  answered,  an  old  man  and 
woman;  and  they  were  at  home,  unless  out  making  "  'lasses." 
It  appeared  that  what  I  had  taken  to  be  milking  was  the 
boiling  of  sorghum-syrup,  and  that  the  slave  people  were 
engaged  at  the  work  all  night. 

After  a  deal  of  knocking  at  the  door,  I  was  admitted  to 
the  other  half  of  the  cabin,  and  found  there  a  middle-aged 
man  and  woman.  By  telling  them  my  story,  and  using  all 
my  eloqaence,  I  finally  enhsted  their  sympathies.  I  asked 
them  to  conceal  me  in  the  cabin.  They  would  not  hear  to 
that,  but  gave  me  a  small  piece  of  miserable  stuif  they 
called  bread,  and  some  sour  syrup,  which  I  ate  ravenously. 
The  food  was  not  fit  for  swine ;  but  it  was  the  best  they  had, 
and  I  was  very  thankful  for  it.  After  I  had  eaten,  the  man 
proposed  to  hide  me  in  the  loft  of  the  stable,  under  some 
piles  of  oat-straw.  The  stable,  he  said,  was  down  in  a  hollow, 
in  a  direction  opposite  to  the  sorghum-mill ;  and  as  the  white 
folks,  and  especially  the  children,  would  be  busy  at  the  mill 


76  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

all  day,  I  would  not  be  likely  to  be  disturbed.  In  a  short 
time,  we  went  tliere ;  and  I  climbed  up  to  the  dark  loft,  and 
crept  into  the  first  straw  I  could  find,  intending  when  day 
broke,  and  I  could  look  about  me,  to  improve  my  lodgings. 

I  at  once  fell  asleep,  but  was  soon  awakened  by  some  one 
below  calling  out,  "  George,  George  !  "  No  Geoige  ap- 
peared to  be  in  the  vicinity ;  and  tlie  man  soon  came  scram- 
bling up  into  the  loft.  I  couldn't  tell  by  liis  voice  whether 
he  was  white  or  black ;  and  I  crept  as  far  into  the  straw  as  I 
could  without  making  a  noise.  Having  reached  the  loft,  the 
man  began  groping  about  as  if  in  search  of  something  At 
every  step  he  approached  nearer  and  nearer  to  me,  and  at 
last  put  his  hand  right  upon  my  shoulder.  I  sprang  up, 
grappled  him,  told  him  to  be  silent,  and  then  asked  who  he 
was.  He  said  his  name  was  Sam,  and  that  he  was  looking 
for  one  of  the  hands  whom  the  overseer  wanted. 

I  told  him  who  I  was,  and  asked  him  not  to  betray  me  ; 
and  he  assured  me  he  would  not.  Then  I  released  my 
hold,  and  let  him  go.  He  appeared  to  be  in  no  hurry,  but 
sat  down  in  the  dark,  and  asked  me  all  sorts  of  questions. 
At  last,  fearing  the  overseer  would  follow  him,  I  asked  him 
to  leave ;  and  he  went,  first  telling  me  to  go  into  a  far 
corner  of  the  stable,  and  hide  under  a  large  heap  of  straw 


ESCAPE.  77 

to  which  he  pointed.  I  got  under  the  straw,  and  made  as 
comfortable  a  nest  as  I  could.  Several  men  soon  came  into 
the  stable,  and  chopped  some  of  the  straw  and  hay  for 
fodder. 

The  rain  had  ceased  falling;  and  after  a  while  the  sun 
rose  beautifully,  promising  a  fine  day.  I  slept  most  of  the 
forenoon,  and  in  the  afternoon  crawled  out,  and  cleaned 
some  of  the  mud  from  my  clothes,  making  them  at  least  ten 
pounds  the  lighter.  The  mud  I  threw  out  of  the  loft  door, 
and  then  went  back  to  my  nest.  Soon  afterwards,  two  men 
and  a  boy  came  into  the  stable,  and  up  to  the  loft,  and 
began  chopping  the  straw  in  a  chopping-machine.  The 
boy's  voice  showed  that  he  was  white.  I  kept  very  still,  and 
crept  well  under  the  straw ;  and  it  was  fortunate  I  did  so, 
for  the  boy  pulled  some  of  it  from  directly  over  me  to  feed 
the  machine. 

After  a  while  they  all  went  away,  and  soon  afterwards 
the  sun  set.  The  negro  who  liad  given  me  the  bread  had 
promised  to  send  a  man  to  show  me  the  road ;  and,  about 
nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  this  man  came  into  the  loft, 
bringing  a  pail  of  water  and  two  pieces  of  warm  bread, 
with  a  little  piece  of  pork  skewered  on  to  the  bread.  This 
was  very  acceptable,  and  I  ate  nearly  all  of  it.     However, 


78  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

the  man  said  lie  could  not  go  witb  me,  because  be  bad  to 
work  tbat  nigbt.  I  was  very  mucb  disappointed  at  tbis,  but 
took  courage,  and,  deciding  to  make  tbe  best  of  my  situation, 
got  tbe  direction  as  near  as  I  could,  and  set  out  for  anotber 
nigbt  of  wandering. 

I  wandered  about  all  nigbt,  going  tbrougb  almost  impene- 
trable forests  and  brier-jungles,  up  and  down  steep  bills,  across 
brooks,  ditcbes,  and  over  ploughed  ground  and  old  corn- 
fields ;  but  no  road  could  I  find.  At  last  I  lay  down  under 
a  pine-tree,  breaking  off  some  bougbs  to  keep  me  from  tbe 
damp  ground  :  but  tbe  nigbt  was  so  cold,  I  could  not  sleep ; 
and  getting  up,  and  wandering  about  again,  I  came  to  a 
tobacco-barn,  and,  entering  it,  found  tbe  floor  covered  witb 
corn-busks.  Heaping  some  of  tbe  dryest  of  tbese  busks 
together,  I  lay  down  upon  them,  and  soon  fell  into  a  deep 
slumber. 

I  was  at  last  awakened  by  some  one  opening  tbe  door 
of  tbe  barn.  By  tbe  red  light  of  daybreak,  which  shone 
tbrougb  tbe  chinks  of  the  logs,  I  saw  it  was  an  elderly  white 
man,  carrying  a  basket  on  each  arm.  Passing  me  so  closely, 
tbat,  by  reaching  out,  I  could  have  touched  him,  be  made 
his  way  to  the  back  of  tbe  barn,  and  filled  his  basket  with 
corn,  of  which  there  was  a  little  pile  in  that  part  of  the 


ESCAPE.  79 

building.  Having  done  this,  he  went  away,  passing  again 
closely  to  me  without  giving  any  sign  of  recognition.  I  was 
covered  with  husks  to  my  waist;  and  the  lining  of  my 
jacket,  which  I  wore  outside,  was  of  about  the  color  of  dried 
corn-leaves.  I  kept  perfectly  still,  and  felt  somewhat  re- 
lieved when  he  closed  the  door,  but  not  entirely  at  ease. 
He  might,  perhaps,  have  seen  me,  and  have  gone  to  bring 
help.  Springing  up,  I  caught  sight  of  him  passing  round 
a  corner  of  a  wood.  I  followed,  intending  to  set  my  mind 
at  rest ;  and  soon  saw  him  go  to  a  house  surrounded  by 
sheds  and  outbuildings  of  all  shapes  and  sizes,  and  begin  to 
do  up  his  morning  chores.  This  satisfied  me  that  all  was 
right.  ' 

An  old  apple-tree  stood  near ;  and  under  it  were  a  few 
windfalls  which  had  not  been  deemed  worth  picking  :  these 
I  confiscated,  and  went  back  to  the  barn.  By  the  daylight, 
I  discovered  there  was  a  scaffolding  built  on  the  cross-pieces 
upon  which  the  tobacco  was  hung  to  dry.  It  was  covered 
with  bundles  of  corn-leaves ;  and,  climbing  up  to  it,  I  broke 
my  fast  on  the  bit  of  bread  I  had  left,  and  some  of  the  ap- 
ples, and,  after  that,  fell  asleep  again. 

I  soon  heard  voices  outside,  and,  looking  through  a  crev- 
ice, saw  the  same  old  man  and  three  children  picking  peas  in 


80  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

an  adjoining  field.  Every  little  while  tlie  children  would  pass 
by  with  loaded  baskets,  carrying  them  down  to  the  woods 
beyond.  I  had  begun  to  think  the  road  to  Danville  was  a 
myth,  —  a  kind  of  will-o'-the-wisp,  —  and  wanted  to  look  for 
it  in  the  daylight,  and  so  be  rid  of  the  terrible  indefinite- 
ness  and  do'ubt  of  night-tramping :  so,  watching  an  opportu- 
nity when  the  children  had  disappeared  down  the  wood-path, 
I  slipped  out,  and,  the  door  being  on  the  side  away  from  the 
man,  got  away  unseen. 

I  scouted  along  in  what  seemed  to  be  the  right  direction, 
hoping  to  come  upon  some  negro  who  would  show  me  the 
road,  but  met  none  until  it  was  quite  dark.  I  had  struck 
a  narrow  road,  and  decided  to  follow  it ;  when,  looking  back, 
I  saw  a  horseman  coming,  and  changed  my  mind.  Conceal- 
ing myself  in  a  ditch,  I  waited  for  him  to  go  by.  He  was  a 
young  man,  mounted  on  a  stout  sorrel  horse. 

Crossing  the  road,  I  then  kept  along  near  it,  in  the  woods, 
and  took  my  way  to  the  top  of  a  high  hill  not  far  distant, 
wishing  to  get  a  view  of  the  country  to  the  south-west.  Very 
many  trees  obstructed  the  view  from  the  crest  of  the  hill : 
but  beyond  it  was  another  and  comparatively  bare  hill ;  and, 
although  there  was  a  house  upon  it,  I  determined  to  recon- 
noitre it,  and  see  if  I  could  not  discover  the  road  to  Dan- 


ESCAPE.  81 

ville.  Going  into  a  ravine,  and  crawling  down  on  the  other 
side,  I  soon  discovered  that  the  house  was  deserted.  I  had 
a  very  extensive  view  from  an  upper  window,  but  could 
see  nothing  but  the  same  old  things,  —  round  hills  and 
tobacco-barns,  and  round  hills  and  pine-woods ;  the  former 
the  more  numerous  of  the  two.  The  only  moving  thing  in 
sight  was  a  flock  of  sheep  about  half  a  mile  away. 

I  did  not  like  the  appearance  of  things  in  that  direction, 
and  went  back  to  the  road,  gathering  a  few  ripe  fox-grapes 
on  the  way.  The  road  looked  much  smaller  than  when  I 
left  it ;  and,  seeing  a  few  houses  a  quarter  of  a  mile  away, 
I  concluded  it  had  forked  between  where  I  left  it  and  where 
I  came  upon  it  again.  I  started  back  for  the  fork,  but  had 
not  gone  far  before  I  came  to  a  road  branching  to  the  right ; 
and  thinking  it  might  lead  to  the  main  road,  if  there  were 
any,  I  turned  into  it,  and  was  walking  carelessly  along, 
when  I  came  directly  upon  a  tobacco-barn.  I  was  very  near 
to  it;  when  suddenly  a  white  man  walked  out,  and  com- 
menced handing  tobacco  to  some  one  inside.  Falling  on 
the  ground,  I  drew  myself  slowly  and  quietly ,  back,  and 
managed,  without  being  seen,  to  get  to  a  little  hollow,  deep 
enough  to  conceal  my  body.  I  lay  there,  and  watched ;  and 
soon  a  team  passed  laden  with  tobacco,  and  soon  afterwards 


82  ADBIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

a  little  negro  boy  ran  by  within  half  a  yard  of  me.  I  was 
afraid  he  had  seen  me,  and  would  tell  the  })eople  at  the 
barn ;  so  I  crawled  back  still  farther,  but  not  out  of  sight  of 
the  barn :  and  soon  an  old  white  hound,  which  had  followed 
the  boy,  came  and  made  friends  with  me. 

I  determined  to  speak  to  the  negroes  when  they  should 
return ;  and  after  they  had  unloaded  the  tobacco,  and 
started  back,  I  ran  out,  and  jumped  upon  their  wagon. 
They  looked  at  me  with  great  astonishment,  but  with  a  bit 
of  a  smile  lurking  in  the  corners  of  their  eyes.  I  asked  them 
if  they  knew  what  kind  of  an  individual  I  was.  They 
laughed,  and  looked  at  one  another  with  knowing  looks,  but 
said  nothing.  They  were  two  quite  pretty  girls,  a  young 
man,  and  the  boy.  I  told  them  who  I  was,  and  what  I 
wanted.  The  girls  asked  if  I  was  married  ;  and,  when  I 
told  them  I  was  not,  they  said  they  were  glad,  for  it  was 
bad  enough  that  the  old  folks  should  worry  about  me.  They 
were  very  inquisitive,  and  asked  very  sensible  questions. 

I  rode  to  the  tobacco-field  with  them ;  and  they  told  me  to 
hide  in  a  wooded  ravine  near  by  until  night,  and  to  come 
up  then  to  the  stable  near  the  house,  and  they  would  give 
me  something  to  eat,  and  full  directions  how  to  find  the 
wished-for  road. 


ESCAPE.  83 

I  waited  until  night  in  the  wood,  and,  while  waiting, 
saw  one  of  the  girls  come  down,  and  pass  very  near  to  me, 
and  then  come  back  ao;ain.  Concluding;  from  her  movements 
that  she  was  searching  for  me,  I  gave  a  low  whistle ;  when 
she  approached,  and  told  me  I  must  not  go  to  the  stable,  but 
to  a  straw-stack  some  distance  in  the  rear. 

As  soon  as  it  was  dark,  I  went  there,  and  crouching 
down  between  one  of  the  stacks  and  a  little  pen,  and  waiting 
a  while,  heard  a  man  coming  from  the  house,  singing  in  that 
weird  and  doleful  style  peculiar  to  the  slaves  of  the  South. 
He  laughed  when  he  found  me,  saying  he  did  not  know  but 
I  might  be  kept  away  by  the  fear  of  betrayal.  I  said  I 
could  trust  him ;  for  he  was  too  smart  to  betray  one  of  his 
best  friends  to  his  worst  enemies.  He  saw  the  matter  in 
that  light  precisely. 

We  sat  a  while  under  the  stack  while  I  ate  a  hearty  sup- 
per of  the  food  he  had  brought,  —  some  fresh  milk,  sor- 
ghum-syrup, and  warm  corn-bread.  He  kept  a  respectful 
silence  while  I  was  eating,  but  overwhelmed  me  with  ques- 
tions  about  the  state  of  affairs  at  the  North,  and  more  par- 
ticularly about  the  plans  and  feelings  of  the  Grovernment 
with  regard  to  the  uegi-o,  as  soon  as  I  said  my  hunger  was 
satisfied.     I  was  surprised  at  the  good  sense  he  showed, 


84  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

and  answered  him  very  carefully  and  conscientiously.  One 
of  the  man's  friends  soon  came  by,  and  asked  him  to  go 
a-hunting ;  and,  not  wishing  the  other  to  know  I  was  there, 
he  pretended  to  be  pulling  straw  out  of  the  stack,  and  told 
his  friend  to  go  to  the  stable,  and  wait  for  him  there. 

Soon  afterwards  I  bade  him  good-by,  and  started  with 
a  light  heart  for  the  road,  which,  it  appeared,  was  a  mile 
and  a  half  or  two  miles  to  the  northward.  There  was  a 
new  moon  and  a  bright  starlight,  and  they  made  the  way 
pleasant.  When  near  the  road,  I  met  about  a  dozen  ne- 
groes, and,  as  I  passed,  heard  one  of  them  say,  "Why, 
he'm  a  white  man  !  "  My  jacket  was  wrong  side  out,  and 
it  was  not  light  enough  for  my  blue  trousers  to  be  seen. 
I  judged  from  appearances  that  they  had  been  to  some 
religious  meeting. 

At  last  I  found  the  road  I  had  been  so  long  looking 
for.  It  seemed  like  an  old  friend;  and  I  started  towards 
Danville,  feeling  that  every  step  brought  me  nearer  to 
freedom.  Going  about  a  mile,  I  came  to  the  church, 
which  the  old  negro  had  said  was  near  to  Sandy  Creek; 
and  was  so  glad  to  see  it,  and  to  know  that  I  was  on  my  right 
way,  that  I  took  off  my  hat  to  it  as  I  went  by.  Soon 
afterwards  I  came  to  the  creek,   and,   with  a  light  heart, 


ESCAPE.  85 

kept  on,  passing  two  tobacco-barns  on  the  left,  and  a  plan- 
tation with  its  village  of  cabins  and  outbuildings  on  the 
right. 

Not  long  afterwards,  I  reached  the  plantation  I  had  so 
long  been  in  pursuit  of.  The  sky  was  somewhat  cloudy; 
and,  the  buildings  being  among  a  dense  grove  of  trees,  I 
could  not  tell  one  from  another.  After  wandering  about, 
and  waking  up  all  the  dogs,  I  decided  to  go  back  to  the 
road,  and  wait  until  the  dogs  had  stopped  howling.  Going 
about  two  miles  towards  Danville,  I  turned  back,  and 
went  in  once  more  among  the  buildings,  but  soon  became 
utterly  confused  again.  They  seemed  of  all  shapes  and 
sizes,  and  to  face  in  all  directions.  Coming  at  last  to  one 
which  did  not  look  stylish  enough  for  white  folks,  nor  yet 
poor  enough  for  negroes,  I  decided  to  knock  at  its  door, 
and  trust  to  luck  to  extricate  me  if  I  should  get  into 
difficulty.  A  dog  at  the  steps  jumped  up,  and  barked 
and  growled  at  me  furiously ;  but  I  knocked,  and  pres- 
ently a  very  tall,  middle-aged  man,  arrayed  in  shirt  and 
drawers,  came  to  the  door. 

I  told  him  I  wanted  to  see  Bob  Bunyan ;  that  I  was  on 
my  way  to  Danville,  and  had  seen  his  father-in-law  a 
short  distance  back,  who  had  desired  me  to  stop,  and  tell 


86  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

Bob  that  he  was  sick,  and  wanted  him  to  go  to  him.  This 
seemed  to  satisfy  the  man;  and  he  told  me  to  go  right 
down  the  path,  and  I  would  come  to  Bob's  cabin.  I 
went  on,  and  soon  came  to  another  house  just  like  the 
first,  and,  supposing  it  to  be  the  cabin,  knocked  at  the 
door.  A  dog  sprang  up,  and  I  thought  he  would  go  dis- 
tracted. He  made  a  horrid  din;  but  above  it  I  at  last 
distinguished  a  sharp  voice,  asking  who  I  was,  and  what 
I  wanted.  I  said,  if  she  would  stop  the  dog's  noise,  I 
would  tell  her;  and  she  screamed  out  again,  "Who  be 
ye?     Is  ye  a  white  man,  or  a  nigger?" 

I  told  her  I  was  a  white  man  who  wanted  to  see  Bob 
Bunyan.  "Lucky  ye  told  me  that  just  as  ye  did,  or 
I'd  ha'  put  a  load  into  ye,  shore.  I  don't  see  what  a 
white  man  wants  with  a  nigger  anyhow." 

I  told  her  the  same  story  I  had  told  the  man;  and  she 
said  she  would  tell  Bob  in  the  morning.  I  proposed  to 
save  her  the  trouble;  but  she  cried  again,  "I'd  like  to 
know  who  ye  be  !  "  Being  tired  of  shouting  above  the 
uproar  of  the  dogs,  and  thinking  the  woman  might  learn 
too  accurately  who  I  was  if  I  remained  much  longer,  I 
made  no  reply,  but  started  across  a  piece  of  ploughed 
ground  in  what  I  supposed  was  the  direction  of  the  road. 


ESCAPE.  87 

Coming  to  a  zig-zsig  fence,  I  crept  along  tbe  top  of  it  for 
some  distance,  and  then  sprang  into  the  road  on  the  other 
side :  by  this  means  I  expected  to  balk  the  scent  of  the 
dogs  if  they  undertook  to  track  me ;  and  I  was  sure  they 
would,  because  men  were  moving  about  with  lights, 
shouting,   and  making  a  great  noise  on  the  plantation. 

Springing  upon  the  fence  again,  I  started  back  toward 
the  creek  until  I  came  to  the  next  plantation.  The 
houses  and  cabins  were  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and 
some  shops  and  stables  were  on  the  left.  I  went  into  one 
of  these  stables,  and  by  climbing  up,  and  feeling  over- 
head, found  at  last  a  door  opening  into  the  loft  above. 
I  expected  to  find  some  hay  and  straw  in  which  to  lie 
down  and  conceal  myself;  but  there  was  not  enough  for 
the  latter  purpose ;  and,  after  resting  a  while,  I  evacuated 
the  stable,  and  kept  on  toward  the  creek. 

I  soon  came  to  a  tobacco-barn,  on  the  right  of  the 
road,  and,  going  into  it,  hid  behind  a  pile  of  straw.  I 
was  tired  enough  to  sleep :  but  the  rats  ran  over  me,  and 
nibbled  at  my  hair  and  shoes  whenever  I  was  quiet;  and 
I  was  forced  to  lie  awake.  I  staid  there  until  about  the 
middle  of  the  following  afternoon,  and  then  saw  a  man 
at  work  at  another  barn,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant 


88  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

He  miglit  be  a  negro :  so  I  decided  to  go  down  tlie  road 
and  ascertain.  I  did  so,  and,  getting  near  enough  to 
see  lie  was  of  the  loyal  color,  whistled,  and  beckoned 
him  to  come  over  to  the  road.  I  inquired  if  there  was 
any  one  working  with  him,  and  he  said  no ;  and  I  then 
told  him  who  I  was,  and  that  I  wanted  to  see  Bob 
Bunyan. 

He  advised  me  to  hide  in  the  barn,  and  promised  to 
bring  me  some  food  at  night,  and  go  with  me  to  Bob's 
house.  The  plantation  mansion  was  in  sight ;  but  it 
was  located  in  a  deep  hollow,  and  some  distance  off:  and 
going  into  the  barn,  and  seeing  it  would  be  a  good  hiding- 
place,  I  decided  to  follow  the  negro's  advice.  There 
was  a  scaffolding  in  the  barn,  built  upon  poles,  about  as 
high  as  a  man's  head,  and  covered  thick  with  sugar-cane- 
seed  spread  out  to  dry  ;  and  under  this  scaffolding  was 
a  quantity  of  straw  and  fodder.  I  made  a  nest  in  this 
fodder,  in  the  back  part  of  the  barn,  under  the  scaffold- 
ing; and  at  night  the  man  came,  bringing  another  with 
him  by  the  name  of  Justin.  After  conversing  a  while, 
the  first  negi'o  accompanied  me  to  see  Bob. 

I  found  this  earnestly-sought  individual  not  much  of 
a  man  after  all,   and  was  not  a  little   disappointed.     He 


ESCAPE.  89 

appeared  to  have  no  decision  of  cliaracter.  I  asked  him 
what  he  knew  about  the  road  to  Knoxville ;  and  his 
answers  were  indefinite  and  unsatisfactory.  He  had  no 
clothes,  but  thought  he  could  get  some  if  I  could  wait 
until  Sunday,  when  he  should  go  over  to  his  wife's  house. 
I  asked  the  other  man  where  I  had  better  stay,  and  he  ad- 
vised me  to  remain  in  the  barn.  I  went  there,  and,  snus- 
gling  again  into  my  bed  of  straw,  slept  soundly. 

Bunyan  told  me  he  could  not  imagine  who  it  was 
that  had  made  such  an  ado  the  night  before  at  the 
plantation.  He  said  they  tried  to  track  me,  but  lost 
the  trail  after  going  about  two  miles.  The  dogs  could 
not  find  it  again :  they  did  not  once  think  of  my  going 
upon  the  fence. 

October  seventh  was  the  anniversary  of  my  enlistment. 
Three  years  in  the  service !  No  event  worth  mention  hap- 
pened during  the  day.  I  kept  very  close,  and  at  night 
received  some  food  from  the  negro.  The  day  was  very 
cold  ;  and  a  strong  north '  wind  came  through  the  chinks 
of  the  logs,  making  my  straw-bed  an  airy  one. 

October  eighth. — Nothing  occurred  this  day  worth  not- 
ing. The  weather  was  again  cold,  and  the  wind  as  high 
as  during  the  previous  day. 


90  ADRIFT   IN  DIXIE. 

October  ninth.  —  This  was  Sunday,  and  it  blew  a  hur- 
ricane. The  day  was  again  very  cold,  and  the  barn 
much  exposed.  I  went  into  the  road,  hoping  to  find  some 
place  sheltered  from  the  wind,  and  perhaps  some  nuts 
or  fruit ;  for  the  negroes  did  not  bring  me  as  much  food 
as  my  hunger  demanded.  I  had  quite  a  pleasant  tramp, 
and  did  not  return  to  the  barn  until  late  in  the  afternoon. 
Then  I  ascended  the  scaffolding  to  eat  some  sugar-cane 
I  had  gathered;  and  while  sitting  there,  stripping  off  the 
tough  outside,  and  eating  the  sweet  pith  of  the  cane,  a 
shadow  darkened  the  door,  the  top  of  which  was  about 
on  a  level  with  my  seat.  Looking  down,  I  saw  stand- 
ing in  the  entrance  a  portly,  well-dressed  old  man,  with 
a  fat,  florid  face,  blue  eyes,  and  long,  silvery  white  hair. 
He  wore  gold  eye-glasses,  and  carried  a  gold-headed  cane. 
I  did  not  dare  to  move.  He  peered  about  under  the 
scaffolding  at  his  fodder,  and  then,  standing  on  tiptoe, 
looked  up  to  the  platform  to  see  how  his  cane-seed  was 
thriving.  It  was  somewhat  dark,  and  he  did  not  see  me 
at  first;  but,  when  he  did,  he  -started,  and  cried  out, 
-Hello!" 

I  echoed  the  salutation. 

"You're    a   soldier,    I   reckon?"    he   said. 


ESCAPE.  91 

*'  Yaas,"  I  answered,  imitating  the  voice  of  a  Southerner. 
"■  I  b'long  ter  the  Seventh  Looisiana.  I'm  gwine  on  down 
ter  Danville  :  got  some  tired,  and  thought  I'd  come  in 
here  ter  rest." 

"  Ah ! "  he  exclaimed,  "  you've  been  in  a  good  many- 
battles,    I   suppose?" 

"Wall,  not  many,"  I  replied.  "I've  served  mostly 
under  Dick  Taylor  and  Breckenridge,  and  haven't  fit  much 
'cept  skirmishin'.  Jist  been  fightin'  up  in  the  valley 
right  smart." 

"Ah!  were  you  in  that  battle?  Well,  the  Yankees 
rather  got  the   best  of  ye  there,   didn't  they?" 

"  Yaas,  they  used  us  pretty  rough,"  I  answered.  "  We 
got  licked,  and  no  mistake ;  but  the  Yanks  was  three  to 
our   one." 

"Yes,  I  suppose  they  were,"  he  replied.  "Where's 
your  regiment?  " 

"  Wall,"  I  answered,  "  thar  aren't  much  on  it  left,  and 
most  of  them  are  on  extra  duty,  or  some  detail  or  other,  — 
clerks  or  wagoners,  or  some-  sich.  You  see,  as  the  Yanks 
hold  our  State,  we   don't  git  no  recruits." 

"  Well  how  do  the  Yanks  treat  the  folks  down  in 
Louisiana?" 


92  ADRIFT   TN  DIXIE. 

"  Oh !  as  wall  as  you  could  expect  in  war-times  from 
such  a  blasted  thievin'  set.  The  Yanks  are  a  pack  of 
thieves  anyhow." 

"That's  so!"  he  replied.  "Have  you  heard  the  news 
fi-om  Danville?" 

"No,"  I  answered:  "I've  just  come  down  from  the 
valley,  and  haven't  heard   much." 

"  They're  making  the  Yanks  work  on  the  intrench- 
ments,"  he  said.  "  They  licked  a  Yank  nigger  to  death 
there  the  other  day  for  not  working.  He  said  he  wouldn't 
work.  They  said  they'd  whip  him  until  he  did.  He 
wouldn't,  and  they  whipped  him  until  he  died.  And  I 
think  they  served  him  right;  don't  you?" 

I  felt  like  springing  on  the  old  scoundrel,  but,  after  a 
moment's  hesitation,  said,  "Yaas:  they  must  be  kept  un- 
der." This  seemed  to  satisfy  him.  We  conversed  some 
time  longer;  and  he  asked  me  about  the  cultivation  of 
sugar-cane  and  the  making  of  sugar.  I  told  him  what 
little  I  knew  about  it,  which  was  much  more  than  he 
knew.  He  then  wanted  to  know  what  part  of  Louisiana 
I  came  from ;  and  I  told  him  from  about  twelve  miles  west 
of  Franklin,  —  Bayou  Teche  County. 

He  then  asked  if  I  thought  there  would  be  a  frost  the 


ESCAPE.  93 

coming  nigbt.  He  feared  his  tobacco  would  spoil ;  and,  if  he 
thought  there  would  be  one,  he  would  set  his  hands  to 
work,  notwithstanding  it  was  the  Sabbath,  — their  regular  hol- 
iday. I  told  him  I  thought  it  too  windy  for  a  frost ;  not 
caring,  of  course,  whether  there  was  one  or  not,  except  that 
perhaps  I  would  have  preferred  to  have  had  his  tobacco 
spoiled.  He  asked  what  I  thought  about  the  Northern  elec- 
tio'n ;  and  I  answered  that  I  didn't  agree  with  the  mass  of 
the  people  on  that  subject,  and  thought  Lincoln  would  be 
elected.     "  And  so  do  I,"  said  he. 

He  had  seated  himself,  and  I  thought  he  would  never  go. 
I  had  slipped  off  my  jacket  while  talking  with  him,  and  put 
it  on  again  wrong  side  out,  and  asked  him  in  a  careless  way 
if  he  thought  it  would  hurt  the  cane-seed  to  lie  on  it.  He 
said  no,  he  did  not  think  it  would.  *' Well,"  I  said,  "I 
reckon  I'll  take  a  nap ;  "  and  I  flung  myself  down  in  a  very 
exhausted  manner. 

"I  reckon  you  are  pretty  tired,"  he  said.  "Yes,"  I 
answered,  "  very."  —  "  Are  your  feet  very  sore  ?  "  —  "  Yes, 
I  am  in  a  bad  way  with  my  feet ;  but  I  reckon  I  kin  get  ter 
Danville  without  inuch  trouble."  I  didn't  say  any  thing 
more ;  and  presently  he  rose,  and  said  he  reckoned  he  would 
go  out  and  look  at  his  tobacco. 


94  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

When  he  was  finally  gone,  I  got  down  from  the  loft  and 
watched  hini.  He  crossed  the  road,  and  went  over  into  a 
field,  hut  not  quite  out  of  .sight :  soon  he  came  back,  and  I 
climbed  up  on  the  platform  again.  He  looked  in  at  the 
door;  but  I  was  very  soundly  asleep,  and  did  not  hear  him. 
Apparently  satisfied,  he  went  off  towai'd  the  house;  but 
before  he  got  there  I  was  out  of  the  barn,  and  well  out  of 
the  way.  I  walked  on  the  top  of  the  road-fence  for  some 
distance  to  balk  the  scent  of  dogs,  and  then  scouted  back 
through  the  woods  to  the  other  side  of  the  farm ;  for  the 
negro  was  to  bring  my  clothing  that  evening,  and  I  wanted 
to  see  about  some  other  things  which  the  man  Justin  had 
suggested.  I  was  near  the  Dan  River,  and,  in  conversations 
with  this  man,  had  ascertained  that  the  town  of  ^Weldon 
was  on  the  Roanoke  River,  into  which  the  Dan  emptied,  I 
knew  that  a  railroad  ran  from  Weldon  to  Petersburg,  and 
thought,  if  I  could  reach  the  former  place,  I  should  not 
miss  my  way  nor  waste  all  my  energy,  as  I  had  done, 
in  a  fruitless  search  for  the  right  road.  Justin  had  told  me 
I  might  get  a  chance  to  go  down  the  river  on  a  boat ;  and 
that  he  knew  of  one,  the  owner  of  which  would  be  glad  to 
help  me. 

Justin's  cabin  had  been  pointed  out  to  me  the  night  I  went 


ESCAPE.  95 

to  Bunyan's ;  and,  when  it  was  fully  dark,  I  went  to  it.  We 
were  expecting  Bunyan  to  come  there.  He  was  not  there  ; 
but  Justin  was,  and  received  me  very  cordially.  He  told  me 
that  the  boat  he  had  in  mind  would  start  down  the  river  ear- 
ly in  the  morning,  and,  about  midnight,  suggested  that  some- 
thing should  be  done  towards  changing  \nj  Union  for  Rebel 
regimentals.  He  had  a  pair  of  homespun  trousers,  nearly 
new,  which  he  gave  me  in  place  of  my  worn  blue  ones,  and  a 
coat  which  would  answer  the  emergency,  but  had  nothing  in 
the  way  of  a  hat  or  a  cap.  The  vizor  was  gone  from  mine, 
however ;  and  it  would  not  be  likely  to  betray  its  character. 

When  I  was  finally  dressed  in  the  new  toggery,  Justin 
gave  me  a  sash  for  my  waist,  and,  with  a  gleeful  exclamation, 
declared  my  disguise  perfect.  Filling  then  my  pockets  with 
bread  and  sweet-potatoes,  and  wishing  me  all  kinds  of  good 
luck,  he  and  his  family  bade  me  good-by. 

The  boat  was  at  the  ferry  at  the  town  of  Milton,  N.C., 
about  five  miles  distant.  Justin  gave  me  fall  directions  how 
to  find  it ;  and,  as  the  moon  was  shining  brightly,  I  had  a 
very  pleasant  walk  :  but,  when  I  reached  the  river,  I  found  it 
covered  with  a  dense  fog,  which  hid  the  opposite  bank,  and 
all  but  a  naiTOw  strip  of  the  water.  Nothing  was  on  this 
side  but  an  old  sunken  skiff.     I  hallooed  several  times,  but 


96  ADRIFT  IX  DIXIE. 

no  one  answered ;  and,  it  being  very  cold  and  damp,  I  cast 
about  for  some  shelter.  A  slianty  stood  on  the  river  bank, 
but  it  was  locked  ;  and  so  I  started  back  on  the  road  to  find 
some  place  into  which  I  might  crawl,  and  sleep  until  day- 
break. 

The  moon  had  by  this  time  set,  and  it  was  quite  dark. 
AValking  a  mile,  I  came  to  a  branch  road  ;  but  going  upon  it, 
and  finding  no  shelter,  I  hurried  back  in  disgust,  and, 
again  taking  to  the  ferry-road,  went  on  a  little  fai-ther.  Soon 
seeing  something  lai'ge  and  black  over  in  a  field,  I  climbed 
the  fence,  and  found  a  rick  of  cornstalks.  They  were 
stacked  very  compactly,  and  I  could  not  make  a  hole  large 
enough  to  get  into,  but  did  the  best  I  could,  and  lay  just 
lono;  enouo;h  to  ascertain  that  I  should  freeze  if  I  remained  a 
minute  longer.  I  then  rose,  and,  as  soon  as  my  legs  grew 
limber,  started  back  into  the  road. 

The  air  was  very  cold,  and  a  thick  white  frost  covered 
every  thing.  Groing  a  short  distance  farther,  I  came  to  some 
houses,  and,  walking  in  quietly  among  them,  saw  smoke  and 
sparks  coming  from  the  chimney  of  a  cabin.  I  went  to  the 
door,  and  knocked  ;  was  admitted,  and  made  love  to  the  fire 
immediately.  Five  negi-oes,  three  men  and  two  women,  were 
in  the  room,  —  a  man  and  his  wife  sitting  by  the  fire,  the 


ESCAPE.  97 

rest  lying  in  bed.  It  was  curious ;  but  one  of  the  men 
was  the  boatman  I  was  in  pursuit  of.  He  told  me  the 
boat  was  going  only  a  few  miles  down  the  river,  and  that  it 
was  hardly  worth  my  while  to  go  with  them ;  but  I  might 
do  so  if  I  chose.  I  was  tu'ed  with  waiting,  and  determined 
to  go  as  far  as  they  went,  and  then  strike  out  on  ray  own 
responsibihty :  so,  when  he  went  down  to  the  river,  I  went 
with  him.  After  a  while,  his  coim'ade  came  :  he  was  a  smart, 
sensible  fellow ;  and  I  took  a  liking  to  him  at  once,  which  I 
had  not  done  to  the  other. 

It  was  now  sunrise,  and  the  fog  had  begun  to  clear  away. 
George,  the  new-comer,  advised  me  to  wait  until  the  next 
Friday  or  Saturday,  when  he  should  go  down  to  Weldon, 
a  hundred  and  eighty  miles,  and  would  take  me  all  the  way, 
and  provide  me  with  food.  He  thought  I  had  better  go  back 
to  Justin's  cabin,  that  being  a  quiet  place,  which  the  planter 
did  not  often  visit.  I  decided  to  do  as  he  recommended, 
and,  to  give  my  disguise  a  trial,  went  by  daylight. 

October  tenth.  —  I  met  a  good  many  negroes  on  the  road, 
and  a  few  white  people ;  and  a  smart  young  darky,  coming 
along  with  a  fast  mule-team,  asked  me  to  ride.  I  jumped 
into  his  wagon ;  and  soon  a  large  red-faced  man,  on  a  power- 
ful horse,  rode  by.  Raising  ray  cap,  I  said  "  Good  day"  in 
7 


98  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

the  most  approved  Southern  style ;  and  the  man  returned 
the  salutation  very  graciously.  The  negro  told  me  he  was  a 
bitter  rebel  by  the  name  of  Carnigan,  a  planter  from  Vicks- 
burg,  whence  he  had  been  driven  by  Grant  with  the  loss  of 
all  his  slaves  and  other  property. 

Soon  afterward  we  passed  a  house,  on  the  'porch  of  which 
were  several  white  men  with  rifles.  Some  horses,  with  arms 
slung  to  their  saddles,  were  tied  at  the  gateway.  The  men 
sprang  up  when  they  caught  sight  of  me ;  but  as  we  rode  by 
at  a  rapid  pace,  and  I  appeared  unconcerned,  they  settled 
down  again.  I  was  not  unconcerned,  however  ;  and,  as  soon 
as  we  came  to  a  piece  of  woods,  I  jumped  from  the  wagon, 
and  took  to  cover,  being  of  opinion  they  would  follow  me  as 
soon  as  they  had  thought  the  matter  over.  I  told  the  negro 
I  was  going  to  Danville,  which  was  a  good  excuse  for  leaving 
the  wagon. 

Shaping  my  course  for  the  plantation,  I  went  on  as  far  as 
appeared  to  be  prudent,  and  then  laid  down  under  a  zig-zag 
fence,  and  slept  long  and  quietly.  At  night  I  went  to  Jus- 
tin's cabin.  He  and  his  wife  were  surprised,  but  delighted, 
to  see  me.  He  consented  to  let  me  sleep  in  his  cabin  of 
nights,  and  proposed  to  give  me  a  piece  of  bread  every  day. 
I  laid  down  on  a  coat  which  lie  spread  before  the  lire,  and,  in 


ESCAPE.  99 

spite  of  tlie  vigorous  attacks  of  an  army  of  "  clinkers,"  slept 
soundly  until  daybreak. 

In  the  morning  I  went  out  to  my  place  under  the  fence, 
broke  off  pine-tips  for  a  carpet,  and  arrangod  brush  to  con- 
ceal my  snuggery  from  any  but  prying  eyes.  It  was  very 
tedious  lying  there  under  the  fence,  and  it  seemed  that  the 
sun  never  would  set.  I  had  to  lie  quietly ;  for  on  all  sides 
people  were  passing,  and  in  front  of  mc,  across  a  ravine,  a 
plantation  was  in  plain  sight. 

October  twelfth.  —  This  day  was  as  quiet  and  as  tedious 
as  the  previous  one.  In  the  course  of  it,  I  dug  some  sweet- 
potatoes  from  the  patch  of  the  planter,  and  at  night  roasted 
them  at  the  fire  of  his  slave. 

October  tlurteonth.  — This  day  was  as  void  of  incident  as 
yesterday,  except  that  I  had  a  caller.  While  lying  flat  on 
my  back,  I  heard  a  rustling  near  by,  and,  raising  myself  on 
my  elbow,  saw  a  large,  vicious-looking  snake  crawling  through 
the  fence,  not  a  yard  from  my  head.  He  had  crept  through 
before  he  saw  me,  but  then,  stopping  instantly,  lifted  his  head, 
and  glared  at  me  with  his  large  black  and  brilliant  eyes.  I 
returned  his  ratlier  impolite  gaze ;  but  he  stared  me  out  of 
countenance ;  and  I  lay  down  again  in  disgust,  keeping  an 
eye  on  him.     He  did  not  move  a  hair's-breadth  for  two  mortal 


100  ADBIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

hours.  I  tired  of  his  impudence  at  last,  and  tried  to  make 
him  move  bj  throwing  chips  at  him.  I  imagined  he  was 
Petersburg,  and  shelled  him  vigorously ;  but,  thougli  I  hit 
him  once  or  twice,  he  did  not  so  much  as  wink.  I  could 
see  signs  of  temper  now  and  then  in  a  slight  flattening  of 
his  head,  and  a  more  fiery  glare  of  his  eyes ;  but  be  did  not 
move  an  inch,  only  kept  his  ugly  eye  fixed  on  mine.  At 
last,  near  sunset,  I  heard  him  moving :  he  went  off,  keeping 
on  his  original  course  very  slowly,  and  not  taking  his  eyes 
from  me  until  he  was  yards  away.  At  night  I  described 
him  to  the  negroes ;  and  they  said  he  was  a  ' '  highland  moc- 
cason,"  and  deadly  poisonous.  I  did  not  attempt  to  kill  hun, 
because  I  might  have  exposed  myself  by  rising ;  and  why  he 
did  not  return  my  attack,  I  cannot  conjecture. 

October  fourteenth — This  day  passed  somewhat  like  the 
day  before ;  only  my  caller  was  a  huge  hog,  whom  I  could 
not  persuade  to  stop  long.  I  did  not  go  to  sleep,  lest  I 
might  wake  and  find  my  friend  of  yesterday  in  too  close 
proximity.  Most  snakes  like  to  snuggle  to  something  warm ; 
and  Monsieur  Moccason  might  taste  of  me  if  I  should  dis- 
turb him  too  rudely. 

At  night  I  went  to  the  cabin  to  take  a  final  leave  of  my 
friends.      The   negroes    had   killed    and   nicely   cooked   a 


ESCAPE.  101 

chicken  for  my  journey.  I  bade  them  good-by  with  feel- 
ings in  which  regret  was  mingled,  and  once  more  started  for 
the  ferry.  Arriving  at  the  house  where  I  had  before  seen  the 
boatman,  I  learned  that  the  boat  had  not  as  yet  come  up 
the  river ;  but  they  expected  it  in  the  morning :  so  I  staid 
there  all  night. 

October  fifteenth.  —  In  the  morning,  a  mulatto  girl  named 
Mattie  took  me  to  a  barn,  in  the  loft  of  which  was  a  parcel 
of  corn-husks.  The  barn  was  not  used  for  stock,  and  the 
negroes  thought  it  would  be  a  good  hiding-place ;  and,  when 
the  boatmen  came,  they  would  tell  them  where  I  was,  and 
send  them  to  me.  I  remained  in  the  barn  all  day,  and  to- 
wards night  saw  the  two  boatmen  coming  towards  it ;  but 
several  white  children,  and  a  white  man  on  horseback  talking 
with  the  children,  were  in  the  road  directly  opposite,  and  I 
could  not  show  myself  to  the  negroes  without  being  seen  by 
the  white  man.  One  of  the  men  went  to  the  house,  and 
the  other  —  the  one  I  did  not  particularly  fancy  —  sat  down 
by  the  roadside.  The  white  man  rode  away,  and  then  the 
children  began  talking  to  the  negro.  I  came  down  from  the 
loft,  and,  when  the  children  were  not  looking,  waved  my  cap 
to  the  man.     He  saw  me,  and  motioned  me  back  out  of 


102  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

sight.  I  hid  my'self,  hoping  he  would,  as  soon  as  the  chil- 
dren went  away,  come  to  me. 

Keeping  watch  of  him,  I  soon  saw  the  other  man  come 
out  of  the  house,  and  join  him  in  the  road,  and  knew  by  his 
looks  that  he  did  not  say  any  thing  to  the  other  of  my  being 
there,  for  fear  he  might  turn  back,  and  attempt  to  speak  to 
me.  He  did  not  wish  me  any  harm,  but  was  afraid  he 
miglit  get  into  trouble  by  aiding  me. 

When  night  came,  I  went  to  the  cabin,  and  asked  the 
negroes  what  they  had  said ;  but  they  were  all  away  when 
the  men  called,  and  had  not  seen  them  at  all.  I  felt  some- 
what disheartened ;  but,  ascertaining  from  Mattie  that  the 
boatmen  lived  where  I  had  passed  the  armed  men  on  the 
porch,  I  determined  to  go  there  and  see  them,  although  it 
was  four  miles  away.  Going  first  to  the  ferry,  and  finding 
the  boatmen  not  there,  I  about-faced,  and  started  for  the 
house.  A  bright  moon  was  shining,  and  objects  were 
plainly  visible  ;  and,  when  I  had  gone  about  half  a  mile,  two 
white  men  came  right  upon  me.  One  of  them,  in  passing, 
said,  "Seen  anybody  down  to  the  ferry?"  I  answered, 
"  No,  I  haven't  seen  anybody,"  rather  quickly,  and  without 
the  Southern  drawl  which  I  had  thus  far  practised.     I  kept 


ESCAPE.  103 

on  my  way ;  and,  after  a  moment's  hesitation,  they  kept  on 
theirs. 

A  brisk  walk  in  the  moonlight  brought  me  to  the  house. 
The  lights  were  not  yet  out  in  the  mansion;  but,  going 
to  the  negro  cabins,  —  making  a  circuit  without  being  seen, 
—  I  found  George,  the  boatman,  who  to  my  great  disap- 
pointment told  me  he  was  not  going  down  the  river.  The 
load  he  had  been  engaged  to  carry  had  been  given  to 
another  boat  at  a  lower  price.  "  He  certainly  should  go 
down  soon ;  but  it  might  be  in  two  weeks,  or  it  might  be  in 
a  month."  I  inquired  if  he  knew  of  any  canoe  I  could 
get;  and,  after  a  few  minutes'  hesitation,  he  said  that  he 
did,  and  told  me  to  go  down  to  the  ferry,  and  halloo  for 
John  Randolph,  who  was  in  a  boat  on  the  farther  side. 
Randolph  would  give  me  a  canoe,  and  also  tell  me  all  about 
the  navigation  of  the  river.  George  then  gave  me  some 
warm  corn-bread,  and  told  me  to  tell  Randolph  to  make  me 
more.  I  thanked  him  warmly,  for  I  felt  I  was  making  a 
long  stride  towards  liberty,  and  with  light  and  happy  steps 
started  for  the  ferry. 

There  I  called  "John  Randolph"  several  times;  and  at 
last  he  came  across  in  his  boat.  Instantly  I  felt  a  respect 
for  him,  which  was  not  at  all  lessened  on  further  acquaint- 


104  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

ance.  He  was  a  free  negro,  and  commander  of  the  boat. 
"G-eorge"  was  his  right-hand  man,  and  the  other  — 
"  Aleck"  —  was  his  left,  and  a  poor  left  at  that,  and  there- 
fore only  occasionally  used. 

John  was  a  fine-looking  fellow,  of  about  medium  size,  but 
well-formed  and  vigorous.  His  features  were  finely  cut,  his 
eyes  piercing,  and  his  whole  appearance  indicated  true  man- 
hood. I  told  him  every  thing;  and  he  said  that  two  men 
who  crossed  the  ferry  not  long  before  had  told  him  they  met 
a  Yankee  back  on  the  road,  whom  they  would  have  captured 
had  he  not  been  armed  to  the  teeth.  They  were  the  two 
Confederate  soldiers,  and  there  was  some  truth  in  what  they 
said,  —  my  only  weapon  being  an  eating-knife.  John  said 
the  town  was  in  quite  a  panic,  and  thought  itself  already  half 
murdered. 

He  soon  bestirred  himself  to  make  the  bread,  while  I  sat 
under  the  canvas  of  the  boat.  Leaving  the  bread  on  the 
fire,  he  told  me  all  about  the  river,  with  which  he  was  very 
familiar.  I  listened  attentively,  and  repeated  after  him  what 
he  said,  until  I  felt  sure  of  not  forgetting  it. 

I  was  to  travel  only  by  night.  There  were  several  bad 
falls  in  the  river,  which  would  bother  me  a  good  deal.  John 
gave  me  instructions  how   to  pass  them,    and  advised  my 


ESCAPE.  105 

stopping  at  a  plantation  belonging  to  a  widow  lady  some 
distance  below,  and  finding  a  colored  man  of  the  name 
of  Jenkins,  who  would  tell  me  more  of  the  river,  and 
furnish  me  with  more  food  if  I  was  in  need  of  it.  I  was  to 
watch  the  right  bank  of  the  river  for  a  bold  projecting  ledge, 
immediately  opposite  to  which  I  should  find  a  canoe-landing, 
and  a  path  leading  to  the  plantation,  which  was  about  half 
a  mile  inland.  About  a  hundred  and  twenty  miles  down  the 
river,  at  Taylor's  Ferry,  was  a  negro  named  Goler.  I  must 
not  trust  him.  He  was  a  "  mean  cuss."  He  had  betrayed. 
a  party  of  United-States  soldiers  who  had  stopped  at  his 
house  to  rest.  He  went  out  on  pretence  of  getting  some- 
thing for  them  to  eat,  and  brought  instead  a  party  of  Con- 
federate soldiers. 

We  conversed  on  a  gi'eat  many  topics,  and  he  showed 
great  good  sense  on  all  I  asked  him  why  he  did  not  escape- 
to  the  North ;  and  his  answer  was,  that  his  wife  and  children 
could  not  accompany  him,  and  he  could  not  leave  them. 
After  conversing  a  while,  he  returned  to  the  fire  to  see  if  the 
cakes  were  done.  They  were ;  and,  washing  off  the  ashes, 
he  gave  them  to  me,  remarking  that  he  wished  he  had 
some  meat  also,  but  that  it  was  a  scarce  article  in  "them 
parts."     He  then  set  out  to  find  the  canoe      It  was  not 


106  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

where  be  tbouglit  it;  but,  going  farther  down,  we  came 
to  a  creek,  a  few  rods  up  which  two  boats  were  fastened  to 
the  shore.  Thej  were  both  "dug-outs,"  and  one  of  them 
was  a  very  large  one.  John  advised  me  to  take  the  larger 
one,  although  it  had  a  hole  in  each  end,  because  it  was  so 
wide  it  would  not  upset  easily.  Afterwards,  when  in  the 
fierce  rapids,  I  had  reason  to  commend  his  judgment.  He 
mentioned  several  places  on  the  river  where  Rebel  guards 
were  stationed  for  the  very  purpose  of  arresting  men  like 
myself.  They  would  be  the  only  great  obstacle  in  my  way ; 
and,  if  I  could  elude  them,  I  need  anticipate  little  other 
difficulty.  Barksdale  Depot,  South  Boston,  Myiie  Creek, 
and  a  few  other  places,  were  the  only  points  guarded ;  and 
it  was  possible  to  get  by  them,  and  that  possibility  gave  me 
assurance  of  success.. 


CHAPTER    III. 


INLAND    NAVIGATION". 


HE  soon  had  the  canoe  ready ;  and  putting  in  a  long 
setting-pole,  a  scoop  to  bail  out  water,  and  a  long 
paddle,  he  told  me  to  sit  on  the  extreme  end.  I  entered 
it  and  took  the  seat,  but  was  obliged  to  move  forward,  as  the 
water  poured  in  at  the  hole,  which  was  large  enough  to  put 
my  head  through.  Moving  a  little  forward,  however,  I 
brought  the  lower  edge  of  the  hole  just  out  of  water. 
Another  hole,  of  about  the  same  size,  was  in  the  bow ;  but 
it  was  not  quite  so  low  down,  and  did  not  give  me  any 
trouble.  I  had  never  paddled  in  my  life,  but  had  read  of 
canoe  trips,  and  remembered  that  a  canoe  is  kept  on  a 
straight  coui'se  by  a  twist  of  the  paddle  as  it  leaves  the 
water. 

It  was  about  midnight  when  I  bade  good-by  to  the  noble 
colored  man.  He  stood  on  the  bank,  looking  after  me,  and 
wishing  me  all  good  fortune.  Trying  the  experiment  of 
paddling,   I  soon  got  the  knack,   and  propelled  the  great 

107 


108  ADEIFT  IX  DIXIE. 

unwieldy  boat  with  steady  strokes,  making  it  glide  tkrough 
the  water  at  a  rapid  rate.  A  bright  moon  was  shining, 
and  I  went  along  finely. 

About  eight  miles  below  was  Barksdale  Depot,  where 
I  had  escaped  from  the  cars,  and  where  John  told  me  was 
a  Rebel  guard.  Paddling  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  I  came 
to  the  island  which  divides  the  river  just  above  this  depot, 
and,  passing  to  the  right,  soon  saw  the  station-house. 
Bearing  to  the  shore,  and  tipping  the  canoe,  so  the  side 
towards  the  depot  was  wet,  and  of  the  same  color  as  the 
river,  I  lay  down  in  the  bottom,  with  my  arm  hangiag 
over  the  side,  and  trailing  the  paddle  in  the  water.  The 
moon  cast  a  dark  but  narrow  shadow  close  under  the  bank, 
and  my  safety  might  depend  on  keeping  within  this  shadow. 
To  do  that,  it  was  necessary  to  trail  the  paddle,  and  by 
quick,  vigorous,  but  perfectly  noiseless  movements,  keep  the 
canoe  headed  straight  down  the  river;  and  also  to  avoid 
any  snags  or  outstretching  branches. 

Using  the  utmost  caution,  I  ghded  down  to  the  depot 
slowly,  and  in  perfect  quiet.  I  could  see  in  the  indistinct 
moonhght  shadowy  forms  on  the  bank,  and  could  hear 
voices  in  low  converse  a  httle  below  the  station-house. 
Directly  opposite  where  I  first  escaped  was  an  eddy,  into 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  109 

which  the  canoe  entered,  and  for  a  time  scarcely  moved. 
I  was  still  in  view  of  the  persons  on  the  bank ;  and,  if 
the  eddy  should  whirl  the  canoe  out  into  the  stream,  they 
would  surely  observe  me.  Dipping  the  paddle-blade 
deep  down,  I  gave  a  strong  pull;  then,  turning  the  edge 
of  the  paddle  down  stream,  slid  it  forward,  and  gave 
another  strong,  noiseless  pull.  The  boat  obeyed  the 
command,  and  started  gently  forward,  and,  after  ten  or 
twelve  rods  of  this  kind  of  navigation,  passed  a  bend  in 
the  river.  Then  I  halted  again,  and  rising,  and  resuming 
my  paddle  properly,  kept  on,  feeling  that  I  had  made  a 
long  stride  toward  home,  although  only  a  few  rods  from 
the  spot  where  I  had  escaped  nearly  two  weeks  before. 

The  river  ran  very  slowly  for  a  long  distance  ;  and,  be- 
ing pretty  well  tired,  I  did  not  make  much  headway,  —  not 
so  much  as  I  thought.  John  had  told  me  that  the  widow 
lived  eight  miles  beyond  Barksdale  Depot ;  and,  after  row- 
in  o-  a  long  time,  I  began  to  look  for  the  ledge  of  rocks 
he  had  mentioned.  I  saw  ledges,  but  none  that  answered 
his  description ;  and  I  went  on  and  on,  but  no  canoe-land- 
ing appeared,  and  the  cocks  were  already  crowing.  At 
last  the  rosy  flush  of  day  lit  the  sky,  and  I  decided  to  haul 
up  into  the  first  good  place  of  concealment ;  for  I  expected 


110  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

pursuit.  The  disappearance  of  the  canoe,  coupled  with  the 
fact  of  my  being  seen  by  the  two  whites,  would,  I  thought, 
make  a  strong  case  against  me. 

I  watched  the  shore  narrowly,  and,  just  before  the  sun 
rose,  came  to  a  place  which  promised  to  hide  me.  A  lux- 
uriant growth  of  willows  was  on  the  shore,  some  of  them 
reaching  far  out  over  the  river,  and  dipping  into  the  water. 
Hauling  the  canoe  in  among  these  willows,  I  broke  off  a  few 
of  the  branches,  and,  placing  them  along  its  sides  as  if  they 
were  growing  there,  concealed  it  completely  from  any  but 
the  sharpest  eyes.  Taking  out  my  pieces  of  bread,  I  hid 
them  in  a  willow  stump,  and  then  started  back  from  the 
river  to  take  some  observations. 

No  houses  were  in  sight ;  but  I  saw  many  cultivated  fields 
with  numerous  belts  and  patches  of  wood.  Passing  through 
one  of  these  belts,  I  came  upon  a  tobacco-barn,  and,  on  close 
inspection,  found  it  empty.  Near  it  were  some  ripe  persim- 
mons, which  proved  quite  a  treat.  Going  on  a  little  far- 
ther, I  saw  the  chimneys  of  a  house  away  off  upon  a  hill, 
and,  returning  to  see  that  my  boat  was  safe,  set  out  to 
reconnoitre  the  plantation.  A  shallow  brook  ran  from  the 
direction  of  the  house ;   and  I  followed  it,  except  where  it 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  Ill 

was  too  open,  passing  a  granite  quarry  of  as  good  and  clear 
stone  as  I  ever  saw. 

Coming  to  the  house,  I  scouted  along  the  farther  side  of 
the  brook  in  a  little  strip  of  bushes  until  I  came  to  a  road 
running  parallel  with  the  river.  Waiting  here  a  few  minutes, 
I  saw  a  young  negro  coming  down  the  lane  with  some  horses. 
He  stopped  at  the  brook,  watered  the  horses,  and  was  turn- 
in  o-  to  2:0  back,  when  I  whistled  to  him.  He  knew  enough 
to  make  no  demonstration,  and,  quietly  turning  about, 
fastened  his  horses,  and  came  to  where  I  was.  I  knew  I 
could  trust  him,  and  did  so. 

He  said  the  widow's  place  was  about  three  miles  farther 
down  the  river.  He  asked  if  I  was  hungiy,  and,  on  my 
saying  I  wanted  provisions,  went  back  to  the  house,  and 
brought  me  some  food.  Telling  him  to  be  "  mum,"  I  bade 
him  good-by,  and  returned  to  the  river.  I  found  the  canoe 
all  right ;  and  feeling  very  tired  in  body,  and  easy  in  mind, 
lay  down  in  a  cornfield  near  the  river,  —  but  not  near 
enough  to  be  seen,  —  and  had  a  quiet  sleep.  I  slept  until  the 
afternoon,  ami  awoke  much  refreshed.  Then  I  took  a  lunch 
of  bread  and  water,  and,  after  a  good  wash  in  the  river,  felt 
"  as  good  as  new."  While  we  were  encamped  near  Fisher's 
Hill,  just  after  my  capture,  one  of  my  men  gave  me  a  comb; 


112  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

and,  when  T  came  out  of  the  water,  I  combed  my  hair  with 
it,  and  had  a  quiet  laugh  all  to  myself,  thinking  of  the  stun- 
ning toilets  of  some  of  my  gentlemen  friends  at  home. 

Feelino:  somewhat  restless,  I  soon  set  out  on  a  scout  down 
the  river,  and,  going  about  a  mile,  could  see  at  least  a  mile 
farther.  No  houses  were  in  sight ;  and  it  occurred  to  me 
that  I  might  safely  set  out  before  nightfall :  so,  putting  my 
things  back  into  the  boat,  I  pushed  out  into  the  stream. 

The  afternoon  was  beautiful ;  and,  if  I  had  not  been  so 
pre-occupied,  I  should  have  enjoyed  the  trip  exceedingly. 
As  it  was,  I  was  not  entirely  blind  to  tlie  beauty  of  the 
scenery.  The  long,  bright  curves  of  the  river  reflected 
faithfully  the  rocks,  trees,  and  wooded  hills  on  its  banks,  all 
aflame  with  the  gorgeous  hues  of  autumn ;  and  above,  the 
bright  sun,  the  golden,  fleecy  clouds,  and  the  far-off,  beautiful 
blue,  combined  to  form  a  picture  T  shall  never  forget.  I 
could  not  realize  there  could  be  war  in  such  a  beautiful 
place  ;  but  reason  told  me  that  any  one  of  those  grand  old 
trees  or  rocks  might  hide  an  enemy,  whose  greatest  joy 
would  be  my  death. 

I  rowed  along,  all  my  senses  on  the  alert,  and,  going 
about  two  miles,  went  on  shore  to  reconnoitre.  I  could 
hear  the  roar  of  falls  below,  and  thought  it  best  to  see  if 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  113 

there  were  any  houses  near  the  bank.  Pulling  the  canoe 
under  the  overhanging  branches  of  a  weeping-willow,  I  crept 
up  the  left  bank,  and  crawling  through  the  high,  dense 
weeds,  saw  a  broad  extent  of  country,  and,  half  a  mile 
away,  the  raikoad,  and  the  cars  just  passing  towards  Dan- 
ville. 

I  went  down  the  bank,  plunging  along  through  the  dense 
weeds ;  but  the  trees  were  so  thick,  that  I  could  get  no  good 
view  of  the  river.  I  climbed  one,  which  reached  far  out 
over  the  water ;  but  a  great  many  others  reached  out  as  far, 
and  I  could  see  nothing  but  the  swift  current  boihng  and 
surging  below.  Making  my  way  back,  I  found  my  boat  so 
well  hidden,  that  I  had  difficulty  in  finding  it  myself.  I  de- 
liberated whether  to  go  on  or  not,  but  finally  concluded  to 
lie  down,  and  try  to  get  another  nap.  After  a  while,  I  heard 
voices  and  an  occasional  shot.  They  were  sportsmen,  shoot- 
ing birds,  and,  had  I  gone  on,  might  have  shot  game  I 
should  not  have  relished. 

After  a  while,  the  sun  set ;  and,  as  soon  as  it  was  fully 
dark,  I  started.  The  canoe  bounded  along  in  the  swift  cur- 
rent, and  such  quantities  of  water  came  in  through  the  holes 
that  it  was  well-nigh  water-logged  ;  but,  after  a  while,  I 
pulled  up  in  a  quiet  place,  and  repaired  damages.     A  little 


114  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

farther  on,  I  came  to  other  rapids;  but  they  were  not  as 
fierce  as  the  first.  Going  about  a  quart er  of  a  mile  in  these 
rapids,  I  came  to  an  innuense,  overhanging  ledge,  which 
I  thought  was  the  one  John  Randolph  had  spoken  of.  and, 
looking  to  the  left,  could  distinguish  something  like  boats 
fastened  to  the  right  bank,  I  almost  despaired  of  grossing 
the  current  in  my  great  bungling  ark,  and  had  half  a  mind 
not  to  make  the  attempt ;  but  things  ahead  looked  so  very 
squally  and  indefinite,  tliat  I  at  last  started. 

For  about  ten  minutes  I  strained  every  muscle,  and  made 
not  a  rod  of  headway,  though  the  water  foamed  from  the 
strokes  of  the  paddle,  and  the  canoe  reeled  and  tumbled 
about  like  a  drunken  man ;  but  at  last  I  reached  the 
right  bank,  and  got  a  view  up  the  river  for  two  or  three 
rods  beyond  the  boat-landing.  Chnging  to  the  shore  a  few 
minutes  to  get  breath,  I  started  again,  and,  as  the  current 
was  not  quite  so  rapid  under  the  bank,  reached  the  landing 
with  comparative  ease.  Springing  out,  I  fastened  the  boat, 
and,  taking  my  treasure  of  bread  in  my  hand,  started  up 
the  bank  in  a  well-beaten  path  which  apparently  led  to  the 
widow's  plantation. 

Going  about  half  a  mile,  and  crossing  the  railroad  on  the 
route,  I  came  to  a  grove  of  trees,  and,  following  the  path 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  115 

around  its  farther  side,  found  a  quantity  of  barns,  sheds,  and 
straw-stacks,  and,  a  little  farther  on,  some  buildings  which 
looked  like  negro-cabins.  Only  one  of  them  showed  signs 
of  life ;  but  from  the  door  of  that  a  bright  Hght  was  shining 
far  out  into  the  thick  darkness.  A  high  fence  was  between 
it  and  myself;  and  chmbing  it,  and  approaching  nearer,  I 
obtained  a  good  view  of  the  house.  I  did  not  like  its  looks. 
It  seemed  too  good  for  negroes,  and  not  good  enough  for 
white  people ;  but,  stepping  very  lightly,  I  went  right  up  to 
the  door,  and  tried  to  see  who  was  in  it.  I  could  see  no 
one,  but  could  hear  dishes  rattling  as  if  persons  were  eating. 
On  some  pegs,  near  the  door,  straw-hats,  sun-bonnets,  and 
similar  articles,  were  hanging. 

Not  satisfied  with  this  inspection,  I  started  to  go  round 
the  house,  hoping  to  discover  some  windows ;  and,  as  I  start- 
ed, a  little  bit  of  gravel  crunched  under  my  foot,  and  a  dog 
inside  set  up  a  most  hideous  howling.  I  was  too  near  to 
run  :  so,  putting  a  bold  face  on  the  matter,  I  walked  up 
to  the  door,  and  rajbped.  A  loud  voice,  unmistakably  white, 
asked,  "  Who's  thar  ?     What  do  you  want  ?    W^ho  be  ye  ?  " 

I  walked  in,  and  saw  a  large,  powerful  man  sitting  at  a 
table,  and  said  to  him,  "  You  didn't  ask  me  to  come  in; 
but  I  will,  and  tell  you  what  I  want." 


116  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

I  told  him  I  was  on  my  way  to  News  Depot,  but,  coming 
across  the  country  to  shorten  the  distance,  had  got  lost,  and 
would  be  much  obliged  if  he  would  direct  me.  I  imitated 
the  Southern  dialect  as  well  as  I  could,  and  the  man  seemed 
unsuspicious  of  my  true  character.  He  went  to  the  fence 
with  me,  and  pointed  down  the  path  up  which  I  had  come, 
as  the  way  to  News  Depot.  I  knew  it  as  well  as  he,  but, 
pretending  to  be  greatly  relieved,  thanked  him,  and  started 
off.  When  I  reached  the  top  of  the  hill,  —  twenty  rods 
or  more  from  the  house,  —  I  paused,  but  kept  my  feet  in 
motion  as  if  still  walking.  Gradually  I  made  less  and  less 
noise,  and,  when  it  was  time  to  be  out  of  hearing,  stopped 
altogether.  I  did  this  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  movements  of 
the  man,  who  might  be  bent  on  mischief.  He  re-entered 
the  house,  and  did  not  come  out  of  it  again  :  so  I  concluded 
that  all  was  right,  and  walked  forward  on  tip-toe  until  really 
out  of  hearing. 

I  found  the  boat  safe  where  I  bad  left  it.  The  moon  had 
just  risen ;  but  a  dense  fog  covered  the  river,  and  the  air 
was  cold  and  wintry.  I  thought  I  would  not  start  until  the 
moon  was  higher,  and  laid  down  in  the  boat  to  rest  a  while  : 
but  it  was  too  cold  and  damp  to  sleep ;  and  at  last  I  got  up, 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  117 

and  went  inland  to  see  if  I  could  not  do  better  than  I  did 
before. 

I  had  seen  a  tobacco-barn  standing  in  the  open  field,  on 
the  right  of  the  path  leading  to  the  railroad,  and  decided  to 
have  a  nearer  look  at  it.  I  found  it  empty,  and  the  appar- 
ent resort  of  cattle.  I  laid  down  in  a  corner  on  the  ground  : 
but  the  cold  was  too  much  for  me,  ill-fed  as  I  was ;  and  I 
came  near  shivering  myself  to  pieces.  I  bore  it  as  long  as 
I  could,  and  then  started  out  to  see  if  I  could  not  find 
warmer  lodgings. 

Another  barn  was  a  short  distance  off;  but,  on  going  to  it, 
I  found  it  quite  as  comfortless  as  the  other ;  and,  scouting 
around  a  while  longer,  I  concluded  to  make  another  trial  at 
the  plantation.  Taking  a  little  path  which  turned  off  to  the 
left,  and  following  it  some  time,  I  came  upon  a  log-stable.  It 
was  not  far  from  the  overseer's  house,  and  I  was  careful  not 
to  make  any  noise.  I  tried  to  find  some  negro-cabins  ;  but 
gave  up  the  search  at  last,  and  climbed  into  the  stable.  It 
was  locked  below,  but  had  an  open  door  aloft,  up  to  which 
I  clambered  by  the  chinks  in  the  logs.  A  quantity  of  rye- 
straw  was  in  one  corner  :  I  snuggled  into  it,  and,  being  very 
tired,  soon  fell  into  a  deep  slumber. 

I  was  awakened  by  sounds  below,  and,  looking  out,  saw 


118  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

tbat  day  was  breaking.  Only  one  man  was  there,  and  his 
voice  indicated  that  he  was  a  negro.  Climbing  down,  I 
met  him  as  he  came  out  of  the  stable.  I  told  him  who  I 
was,  and  asked  if  that  was  not  the  widow's  j^l^ntation. 
He  said  it  was.  I  then  inquired  if  there  was  such  a  man 
there  as  Jenkins.  He  answered  "Yes,"  and  pointed  to  a 
grove  on  a  little  hill,  at  a  short  distance,  as  the  place  where 
I  should  find  him  ;  telling  me  at  the  same  tune  to  hurry,  as 
the  overseer  would  soon  be  stirring.  I  hastened  to  the 
grove,  from  whence  came  a  great  noise  of  bellowing  and 
shouting,  as  of  many  cattle  being  herded  ;  and  found  a  num- 
'ber  of  negroes  —  men,  women,  and  children  —  driving  a 
large  number  of  cattle  into  an  enclosure.  Accosting  an  old 
woman,  T  asked  if  Jenkins  was  there.  She  pointed  to  a 
rather  elderly  negro,  and  ran  away,  as  if  very  much  afraid, 
not  of  me,  but  of  being  seen  talking  with  me.  I  went  to  the 
man,  and  was  about  accosting  him,  when  a  large  dog  flew 
at  me,  and  bit  my  knee  severely.  I  shook  off  his  grip, 
and  held  him ;  while  I  told  the  astonished  and  somewhat 
frightened  negro  who  I  was  in  as  few  words  as  possible.  His 
first  care,  after  driving  away  the  dog,  was  to  get  me  out  of 
sight  as  soon  as  possible. 

Three  cabins  were  near,  and  one  of  them  was  apparently 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  119 

a  tool-slaop  and  general  storehouse.  The  negro  took  me  to 
the  nearest  one,  where  a  family  lived,  but  in  a  few  mo- 
ments escorted  me  to  the  tool-shop.  Several  men  slept  in  it 
of  nights ;  and  a  fire  was  smouldering  on  the  hearth,  which 
I  was  cautioned  not  to  increase.  Stopping  a  few  minutes, 
and  plying  me  with  rjuestions,  the  negro  left,  for  fear  the 
overseer  might  notice  his  absence. 

After  a  while,  a  tidy  old  negTess,  accompanied  by  a 
good-looking  girl  of  sixteen  or  eighteen,  came  in,  bringing 
a  pitcher  of  excellent  milk,  some  very  good  hot  biscuit,  and  a 
large  piece  of  fresh  butter.  The  old  woman  was  very  ner- 
vous, and  wanted  to  go  away  immediately ;  but  the  young 
one  lingered,  asking  an  occasional  question  in  a  timid  way, 
until  the  older  one  insisted  vehemently  on  her  going.  I  en- 
joyed the  breakfast  greatly,  and,  after  concealing  the  dishes, 
lay  down  on  a  blanket  for  a  nap. 

Several  negroes  then  came  in,  making  a  great  show  of  se- 
crecy, and  telling  me  not  to  be  "  afeard,"  as  they  would  not 
betray  me  on  any  account.  They  all  asked  many  intelligent 
questions,  which  I  answered  to  the  best  of  my  ability ;  but 
they  did  not  stop  long,  lest  the  overseer  should  miss  them. 
They  said  he  had  told  them  of  a  man,  who  he  suspected  was 
not  all  right,   coming  to  his  house  the  night  before,   and 


120  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

inquiring  the  way  to  News  Depot;  but,  if  the  man  would 
let  him  (the  overseer)  alone,  he  would  let  the  man  alone.  I 
asked  how  they  liked  their  mistress  and  the  overseer ;  and 
they  spoke  very  well  of  both.  The  overseer,  they  said, 
was  an  easy-going  man,  and  they  could  fool  him  readily, 
but  had  just  as  lief  work  as  not.  In  spite  of  this,  how- 
ever, they  were  the  most  eager  for  freedom  of  any  slaves  I 
had  seen;  but  I  soon  discovered  they  were  all  religious, 
though  they  made  no  parade  of  it.  The  young  girl  who  had 
brought  my  breakfast  soon  returned  with  another  gul ;  but, 
after  a  few  confidential  giggles,  they  retued,  and  no  one  came 
again  until  afternoon.  Then  the  old  woman,  accompanied 
by  the  girl,  brought  me  a  delicious  apple-pudding  and  some 
hot  corn-bread.  I  made  a  good  dinner,  and  had  a. quantity 
left,  which  I  dried  on  the  hearth  to  carry  away  with  me. 

After  dark  a  negro  came  in,  and  asked  me  out  to  one  of 
the  cabins.  It  was  a  neat,  large  shanty,  with  a  very  pleasant 
room ;  and  its  mistress,  an  old  negi'ess,  looked  and  spoke 
very  much  like  an  old  Quaker  lady.  Her  son,  a  great  jovial 
fellow  of  about  twenty,  had  a  spelling-book,  and  seemed 
from  his  actions  to  wish  me  to  know  the  extent  of  his  learn- 
ing. I  took  the  book,  which  opened  of  itself  to  the  lesson 
commencing  with  "Baker,"  and  found  he  knew  the  whole 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  121 

page  when  I  asked  him  the  words  in  regular  succession; 
but  he  failed  a  few  times  when  I  skipped  about.  He  was 
as  black  as  a  coal ;  but  tbere  was  something  really  good  and 
noble  about  him.  In  speaking  of  the  Rebels,  I  made  use  of 
a  somewbat  strong  expression ;  and,  in  the  gentlest  manner, 
he  asked  if  the  "  good  Book  "  taught  us  to  speak  so  of  our 
enemies.  I  took  the  rebuke  in  good  part,  and,  with  a  feel- 
ing of  mixed  shame  and  amusement,  acknowledged  that  he 
was  right.  After  that,  I  was  very  careful  to  keep  on  my 
best  company  manners.  A  looking-glass  was  in  the  room ; 
and,  for  the  first  time  in  about  two  months,  I  saw  the  reflec- 
tion of  myself.  I  was  not  a  little  amused  at  the  appearance 
of  the  individual  who  confronted  me. 

I  sat  by  their  fire  about  an  hour,  conversing  on  various 
topics ;  and  then  "  Jordan  "  came  in,  and  invited  me  to  go  to 
another  house.  I  bade  them  all  good-by  except  the  young 
man,  whose  name  was  Sam.  He  went  with  us.  We 
stopped  at  the  shop  to  get  my  pieces  of  bread,  and  then,  by 
a  roundabout  route  to  avoid  the  overseer,  went  to  the  cabin, 
or  house ;  for  it  deserved  the  latter  name.  It  was  a  story  and 
a  half  high,  had  glass  windows,  and  was  furnished  generally 
in  good  style.  Entering  it,  I  saw  several  men ;  and  the 
sio;ht  of  one  of  them  made  me  for  the  moment  think  I  was 


122  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

betrayed.  I  turned  to  figlit  my  way  out :  but  the  kindly, 
amused  looks  of  the  negroes  re-assured  me ;  and,  as  I  hesi- 
tated, the  man  in  question  —  who  was  as  white  as  I  am,  and 
dressed  in  a  Confederate  uniform  —  took  off  his  hat,  and 
bade  me  good-evening  in  a  manner  which  at  once  satisfied 
me  that  he  was  a  slave.  A  poor  white  he  certainly  was  not ; 
he  was  too  well-bred  and  good-looking  for  one  of  that  class  : 
and  I  concluded,  and  afterwards  learned  it  was  true,  that  he 
was  the  son  of  the  deceased  planter  by  a  quadroon  house- 
servant. 

The  negroes  had  prepared  me  an  excellent  supper.  The 
bill  of  fare,  as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  was  as  follows,  — 
large  piece  of  boiled  beef,  flanked  by  common  and  sweet 
potatoes ;  large  piece  of  pork,  flanked  by  cabbage  ;  fresh 
biscuit  and  butter ;  pitcher  of  milk,  and  some  wheat-coffee ; 
pitcher  of  syrup,  and  some  genuine  Yankee  gingerbread  ; 
also  an  apple-pie. 

I  ate  heartily,  the  negroes  looking  on,  and  enjoying  my 
evident  satisfaction ;  and,  after  supper,  the  real  business  for 
which  I  was  there  was  attended  to.  Three  or  four  men  con- 
ducted me  into  an  up-stairs  room,  whose  appearance  sur- 
prised me.  A  mahogany  desk  such  as  teachers  use  in  our 
schools,  covered  with  books  and  writing  materials,  several  good 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  123 

chairs,  and  a  neat  bedstead,  were  only  a  part  of  its  furni- 
ture. A  quantity  of  good  clothing  was  hanging  about,  and 
among  it  I  noticed  a  military  coat.  The  white  negro,  seeing 
my  curious  glances,  took  it  down,  and  handed  it  to  me.  It 
was  of  very  fine  blue  cloth,  its  breast  and  skirts  covered 
with  gold  braid  and  lace,  and  altogether  was  as  rich  a 
garment  as  I  had  ever  seen.  It  had  been  the  pride  of  the 
planter  in  his  younger  days,  when  he  was  a  captain  in  the 
United-States  navy,  and  by  him  had  been  given  to  his  slave 
son  who  stood  before  me. 

I  sat  down  to  the  desk,  and  after  a  few  moments'  conver- 
sation, they  supplying  pencil  and  paper,  commenced  taking 
down  what  information  they  could  give  me.  They  told  me 
much  that  had  been  told  me  by  John  Randolph,  and  add- 
ed a  few  particulars,  which  I  wrote  down,  while  they 
looked  over  my  shoulder,  uttering  exclamations  of  admira- 
tion and  pleasure  at  what  they  thought  the  ease,  rapidity, 
and  finish  of  my  writing.  They  desired  me  to  write  some 
words  in  a  blank-book  which  they  had.  I  did  so,  and  then, 
in  as  good  a  hand  as  I  could,  wrote  my  name  and  address, 
and  requested  them  to  write  to  my  relatives  if  they  ever  had 
the  opportunity,  or  to  show  the  paper  to  such  United-States 
soldiers  or  officers  as  might  come  that  way.     This  they  prom- 


124  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

ised  to  do  veiy  cheerfully.     The  following  is  a  verbatim  copy 
of  the  raeinorandum  I  made  on  the  occasion  :  — 

1 .  Wido w plantation. 

2.  Two  2  miles  to  island,  bear  to*  right,  20  feet,  100  yds. 

to  ferry. 

3.  Three  2  miles  to  island,  bear  to  left-hand  bank. 

4.  1^  miles  to  Myrie  Creek. 

5.  Three  miles  to  South  Boston. 

6.  6  Six  miles  to  Slabtown,  Banister  River. 

7.  3  or  4  miles  to  Hicoe  Falls. 

8.  15  miles  to  Clai'ksville. 

35  about. 

No.  2  means  that  at  this  place  is  a  bad  fall,  the  most 
dangerous  part  of  which  I  should  avoid  by  going  to  the 
right  of  an  island  by  a  channel  twenty  feet  wide  ;  after 
which  it  would  be  about  one  hundred  yards  to  News  Depot, 
or  ferry,  where  were  Rebel  soldiers.  No.  3  indicates  another 
bad  fall  to  be  avoided  by  going  to  the  left  of  an  island.  No. 
4,  a  bridge  over  Myrie  Creek,  carrying  the  Richmond  and 
Danville  Raih-oad,  and  crossing  very  near  the  River  Dan  :  a 
guai'd  was  stationed  at  this  bridge,  which  I  was  to  look  out 
for.  No.  5,  a  town  on  either  side  of  the  River  Dan,  and  a 
high  bridge  crossing  the  river :  a  Rebel  guai'd  was  also  sta- 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  125 

tioned  here  to  watch  the  river  for  just  such  fellows  as 
myself,  and  for  suspicious-looking  negroes.  No.  6,  saw-mills 
on  the  river :  the  Banister  empties  into  the  Dan  at  this 
place.  No.  7,  very  bad  falls.  The  negroes  thought  I  had 
better  not  try  to  pass  them  in  my  canoe  ;  but,  if  I  could  get 
by,  it  would  be  plain  sailing  beyond  all  the  way  to  Clarks- 
ville.  With  the  river  below  that  point  they  were  not 
familiar. 

At  Clarksville  the  Staunton  Kiver  joms  the  Dan,  and  the 
two  form  the  Roanoke.  There  I  should  see  the  piers  of  a 
railroad  bridge  which  had  been  destroyed.  The  only  other 
bridge  I  should  find  was  at  Graston,  a  few  miles  below  Wel- 
don.  The  negroes  had  seen  my  boat  at  the  landing,  and 
asked  me  where  I  got  that  "  wonderfal  big  canoe,"  and  if  it 
was  possible  I  had  brought  it  down  river  alone.  On  my 
assuiing  them  I  had,  one  exclaimed  in  unfeigned  admira- 
tion, "  Well,  you  is  a  man  sure  enuff !  " 

I  now  intimated  that  it  was  time  I  was  starting  on  my 
journey.  They  agreed  with  me,  and  we  all  went  down 
stairs.  They  had  provided  me  a  large  cotton  bag  filled 
with  food,  and  an  old  blanket,  which  I  afterwards  found  of 
great  service.  One  had  also  made  me  a  light  paddle.  Their 
cheerful  words  and  thouo-htfal   kindness   so   much  encour- 


126  ADIilFT  IN  DIXIE. 

aged  mc,   that  home   seemed,   for  the    moment,   almost  in 
sight. 

After  a  little  more  conversation,  I  bade  them  good-hy; 
and  they  all  wished  me  a  hearty  God  speed.  The  young 
man  Sam,  and  another  young  fellow  as  like  him  as  possible, 
volunteered  to  accompany  me  to  the  boat.  They  took  a 
roundabout  way,  carefully  avoiding  paths;  and  were  so 
happy,  they  could  not  walk  soberly  along,  but  jumped  and 
capered  about  like  two  crazy  colts,  pulling  up  occasionally  to 
say  a  low  word  to  me,  and  then  indulging  in  their  wild  antics 
again.  I  trudged  along  soberly,  although  I  felt  good  all 
over,  and  would  have  liked  a  romp  with  them ;  but  it  was 
best,  I  thought,  to  stand  a  little  on  my  dignity.  Our  cir- 
cuitous route  lengthened  the  half-mile  to  a  mile,  and  a  pretty 
rough  mile  at  that ;  and  my  clothes  became  so  full  of  burrs, 
that  I  looked  like  a  fine-quilled  porcupine.  The  boys  so- 
bered down  after  a  while,  and  we  conversed  in  low  guarded 
tones.  We  spoke  mostly  of  religious  subjects,  and  they 
seemed  to  have  broad  and  liberal  ideas.  One  of  them 
thought  it  not  well  to  pay  clergymen  regular  salaries.  If 
the  minister  could  not  sufficiently  impress  his  congregation 
to  make  them  open  their  hearts  and  purses  on  the  spot,  he 
should  take  to  some  other  business.     He  made  this  appear 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  127 

very  reasonable ;  but  the  world,  just  now,  is  not  of  his  way 
of  thinking. 

At  last  we  arrived  at  the  river.  The  full  moon  was  just 
rising  over  the  tall  trees  on  the  opposite  bank,  and  casting  a 
broad  veil  of  silver  over  the  rapid  foam-streaked  water.  I 
looked  down  the  dim  curves  of  the  river,  and  wondered 
whether  its  swift  current  was  to  carry  me  to  death  and  an 
unknown  grave,  or  to  the  friends  who  were  longing  and 
praying  for  me  at  home.  I  hoped  for  the  best,  and,  sup- 
pressing all  feelings  of  doubt  and  gloom,  stepped  into  the 
canoe.  As  I  did  so,  the  noble  boys  said,  "  We's  gwine  to 
pray  for  you,  massa." 

My  heart  choking  so  I  could  scarcely  speak,  I  pushed  off 
into  the  broad  track  of  moon-silvered  water ;  but  something 
within  nerved  my  arms,  and  I  felt  strong  enough  to  over- 
come all  obstacles.  As  I  receded  rapidly  from  the  shore,  I 
turned  and  looked  back.  The  boys  were  still  on  their  knees, 
praying.  Taking  a  long  look  at  them,  I  set  to  work  man- 
aging the  canoe ;  for  the  river  was  rocky,  and  all  my  little 
skill  was  required  to  keep  the  canoe  from  being  overturned. 

The  boat  glided  swiftly  along ;  and  I  soon  came  within 
hearing  of  the  falls,  and,  at  the  same  time,  heard  a  train  of 
cars  in  the  distance.     The  train  came  nearer  and  nearer, 


•  1 

128  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 


and  presently  stopped,  and  then  wont  on  again.  I  con- 
cluded the  place  where  it  stopped  was  News  Depot,  and 
began  to  look  narrowly  for  the  channel  which  should  lead  me 
past  the  falls.  The  river  ran  rapidly ;  and  all  I  had  to  do 
was  to  guide  the  boat,  and  keep  near  the  right  bank,  so  as 
not  to  be  carried  past  the  channel.  I  soon  detected  an 
opening  ahead,  and  a  few  vigorous  strokes  ran  the  canoe  into 
it ;  ■  but  in  a  moment  it  was  thrown  high  and  dry  on  the 
island  by  the  fierce  sweep  of  the  current. 

Putting  all  my  things  into  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  I  set  it 
in  motion  again.  Seeing  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt  to 
guide  so  heavy  a  thing  in  such  a  current,  I  ^ve  it  a  strong 
push,  jumped  in,  and,  crouching  low  down,  resolved  to  let 
it  go  as  it  pleased.  It  went  banging  along  against  either 
shore,  knocking  against  stumps,  and  plunging  through 
masses  of  trailing  willows,  which  dragged  their  slimy 
branches  over  me  to  my  infinite  disgust,  but  at  last,  after  a 
very  rough  passage,  came  out  into  the  broad  river  again. 
Then  the  thunder  of  the  falls  told  me  what  I  would  have 
encountered  had  I  gone  the  other  way. 

I  thanked  my  stars  for  having  so  well  overcome  that 
difficulty;  but  News  Depot  was  in  sight,  and  I  had  to  run 
the  gantlet  of  the  Rebel  guards.     I   had   all   along  been 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  129 

thinking  how  I  should  get  by  such  places,  and  had  formed  a 
good  many  plans.  One  of  them  was  to  sink  the  canoe,  so 
it  would  look  like  a  floating  log,  and,  landing  with  my 
traps,  to  set  it  adrift,  go  down  the  opposite  bank,  and  take 
my  chance  of  getting  it  again  below  the  depot.  If  the 
canoe  had  been  lighter,  I  should  have  done  this ;  but  con- 
sidering that  both  ends  were  stove  in,  and  that,  even  if 
whole,  it  was  too  heavy  for  one  person  to  manage,  I  con- 
cluded to  risk  passing  the  depot  in  it.  Its  color  was  light, 
almost  white,  as  water-washed  logs  are  apt  to  be ;  but  I 
remedied  this  by  splashing  water  all  over  its  sides  till  it  was 
quite  as  dark  as  the  river. 

The  moon  cast  a  narrow  shadow  along  the  right  bank; 
and,  guiding  the  canoe  into  it,  I  lay  down  in  the  bottom, 
with  my  right  arm  hanging  over  the  side,  and  trailing  the 
paddle  in  the  water.  The  depot  was  on  the  opposite  shore, 
but  now  quite  near ;  and  the  noise  of  the  fall  was  rapidly 
growing  fainter.  Arriving  opposite  the  station,  I  saw  two 
or  three  men  standing  beside  a  smouldering  fire,  and  heard 
them  speaking  in  low  tones,  but  could  not  distinguish  what 
they  said.  They  were  undoubtedly  sentinels  ;  and  the  least 
noise — the  grating  of  the  canoe  against  a  bush  or  a  stump, 
or  the  slight  scraping  of  the  paddle  against  its  sides  —  would 


130  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

have  attracted  their  attention.  At  last,  however,  I  got 
safely  by;  and  a  great  load  of  anxiety  lifted  from  my 
shoulders  at  the  thought  of  these  two  serious  obstacles  so 
easily  surmounted. 

According  to  the  negroes,  the  next  fall  was  two  miles 
below,  and  I  was  to  avoid  it  by  hugging  the  left  bank  r  so, 
after  a  while,  I  crossed  the  river,  and  made  ready  for  another 
trial  of  my  energies.  As  the  boat  wound  along  around  the 
curves  of  the  river,  the  fall  I  had  passed  would  at  times  be 
wholl}^  inaudible,  and  again  would  roar  out  as  if  it  were 
after  me,  determined  not  to  be  cheated  of  a  victim. 

After  a  while  I  heard  the  falls  ahead,  and  soon  afterwards 
came  to  the  passage.  A  mill  had  at  some  previous  time 
been  there,  and  parts  of  its  walls  and  timbers  were  still 
standing.  I  got  by  this  place  easier  tlian  I  expected,  though 
the  passage  was  difficult  enough.  As  I  went  on,  I  was  some- 
what puzzled ;  for,  though  I  watched  closely  for  the  main 
river,  I  did  not  see  it  again  :  but,  half  a  mile  below,  the  part 
I  was  in  widened  to  the  width  of  the  main  current.  No 
doubt  the  part  of  the  stream  which  went  over  the  rouglr  fall 
had  divided  into  numerous  small  channels  below,  and  re- 
turned to  the  main  river. 

The  next  obstacle  I  was  to  surmount  was  Myrie  Creek. 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  131 

I  was  close  upon  it  before  I  saw  it;  but,  luckily,  I  was 
makiuo-  no  noise,  and,  the  bridge  being  a  rod  or  more  from 
the  river,  I  was  not  very  likely  to  be  seen.  I  heard  voices 
as  I  drifted  by;  but  they  were  apparently  only  ordmary 
remarks.  A  fire  was  at  one  end  of  the  bridge,  and  the  sol- 
diers were  probably  there.  I  could  not  see  them  nor  their 
fire,  only  its  light  reflected  on  the  hill  and  bushes.  I  was 
very  much  elated  at  so  successfully  passing  all  these  dan- 
gerous places  and  began  to  see  my  way  through  quite 
clearly. 

The  next  place  to  look  out  for  was  South  Boston,  where  a 
covered  bridge  crossed  the  river.  I  remembered  seeing  it 
from  my  loop-hole  in  the  car.  The  depot  was  on  the  left 
bank,  but  the  most  of  the  town  was  on  the  right.  It  was 
three  miles  from  Myi'ie  Creek :  so  I  took  things  easily,  and 
got  along  very  comfortably.  As  I  passed  plantation  after 
plantation,  the  bloodhounds  would  bay  out  with  their  deep 
mournful  voices ;  and  they  kept  up  the  doleful  music  until  I 
was  some  distance  away.  They  were  half  a  mile  or  more 
inland;  but,  though  I  made  little  noise,  their  keen  scent 
or  hearing  warned  them  of  my  presence. 
->i  Presently  I  came  in  sight  of  the  bridge  at  Myrie  Creek. 
It  was  a  covered  one,  about  thirty  feet  above  the  water,  and, 


132  ADBIFT  IX  DIXIE. 

from  a  distance,  appeared  to  spring  across  the  river  in  a  sin- 
gle span ;  but,  as  I  came  nearer,  I  discovered  it  was  sup- 
ported bj  five  or  six  stone  piers.  I  adopted  the  same 
policy  as  at  News  Depot,  and  passed  safely,  although  men 
were  on  the  bank. 

The  next  point  to  be  passed  was  Slabtown,  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  negroes,  was  six  or  seven  miles  below.  I  was 
very  much  fatigued,  the  excitement  having  worn  on  me 
much  more  than  the  work ;  and,  sitting  down  in  the 
bottom  of  the  canoe,  I  let  it  drift  by  itself,  the  neoroes 
having  told  me  that  between  South  Boston  and  Hicoe  Falls 
was  a  long  stretch  of  quiet  water.  At  last  I  fell  asleep,  and, 
when  I  awoke,  found  the  canoe  drifting  along  stern  foremost. 
Rousing  up,  I  paddled  some  ways,  but,  still  feeling  very 
tired,  soon  laid  down  the  oars :  and  from  that  time  until 
morning  was  a  confused  period  of  drowsiness,  dreary  glimpses 
of  slowly  gliding  woods,  and  dark  quiet  water;  and  then 
complete  forgetfulness,  varied  by  queer  dreams. 

At  last  the  cocks  began  to  crow  on  the  distant  plantations, 
and  not  long  afterwards  came  the  first  faint  flush  of  daylight. 
I  was  m  hopes  I  had  passed  Slabtown,  as  I  wished  to  run 
the  Hicoe  Falls  by  daylight ;  and,  keeping  all  my  senses  on 
the  alert,  kept  on.     The  scenery  was  bold   and  beautiful, 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  133 

and  the  sun  rose  smiling  on  the  world.  I  breakfasted  off 
the  contents  of  my  bag,  which  I  now  examined  for  the  first 
time.  I  found  in  it,  in  addition  to  my  former  stock,  three 
or  four  good  biscuits,  a  nice  piece  of  beef,  and  some  gin- 
gerbread. I  made  a  good  meal,  and  felt  invigorated, 
particularly  after  washing  my  face  and  combing  my  hair.  I 
heard  noisy  water  below,  and,  not  knowing  how  rough  it 
might  be,  pulled  the  canoe  ashore,  and  walked  down  the 
bank  about  half  a  mile  to  reconnoitre.  In  one  place,  the 
river  fell  two  feet  perpendicularly ;  but,  marking  the  safest 
channel  with  my  eye,  I  went  back,  and  re-embarked.  I  went 
through  all  right,  with  the  exception  of  taking  in  some 
water ;  and,  feehng  sure  this  was  not  Hicoe  Falls,  still  kept 
on  the  alert,  and  going  about  a  mile  farther,  and  hugging 
the  right  bank,  saw  signs  of  a  ferry. 

A  road  came  down  to  the  river  on  the  opposite  shore, 
and  on  this  I  could  see  the  outer  ends  of  several  canoes  and 
flat-boats.  I  dropped  down  very  quietly,  so  as  to  see  before 
being  seen.  An  old  darky  was  standing  by  the  canoes  ;  and 
near  him  was  a  younger  one,  and  close  to  him  a  saw-mill. 
I  watched  the  negroes,  and,  when  I  saw  they  had  seen  me, 
made  gestures  to  them  to  be  quiet,  and  at  the  same  time 
asked  by  gestures  who  was  in  the  mill,  where  I  heard  saw- 


134  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

ing  and  hammering.  They  appeared  very  mucli  frightened, 
and  made  frantic  signs  to  me  to  keep  on.  I  nodded,  and 
did  so. 

The  mill  had  several  windows ;  and  my  heart  was  in  my 
mouth  for  fear  some  one  should  come  to  them.  If  they 
should,  they  would  surely  see  me.  No  one  came,  however ; 
and  I  passed  this  danger,  too,  in  safety.  The  younger 
negro  followed  me  along  the  shore;  and,  when  I  arrived 
at  a  place  of  safety,  I  hauled  in,  and  had  a  talk  with  him. 

The  negroes  knew  very  well  what  I  was  from  my  manner. 
I  asked  the  boy  where  Slabtown  was,  hoping  he  would  say 
two  or  three  miles  back ;  but,  with  a  comical  look,  he  said  I 
had  just  passed  it.  The  saw-mill  was  Slabtown.  I  was 
surprised,  and  conceived  a  small  opinion  of  Southern  towns. 
Some  one  then  appeared  on  the  opposite  bank,  about  half  a 
mile  away,  wishing  to  be  ferried  over.  The  old  man  made 
signs  to  us,  which,  the  boy  said,  meant  I  must  drop  farther 
down  the  river.  I  did  so,  keeping  in  among  the  overhang- 
ing willows,  and,  stopping  again,  had  another  chat  with  the 
darky.  He  advised  me  to  hug  the  left  bank  until  past  the 
rapids,  as  white  folks  were  likely  to  be  at  the  main  fall, 
which  I  had  been  directed  to  take.  The  nearer  a  man  lived 
to  a  place,  the  more  I  thought  he  ought  to  know  about  it: 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  135 

SO  I  concluded  to  follow  this  advice.  I  asked  if  there  was 
any  thing  to  look  out  for  before  reaching  the  fall ;  and  the 
darky  said  another  mill  was  on  the  same  side  of  the  river, 
and  that  was  all.  I  asked  who  was  in  the  mill  I  had  just 
passed ;  and  he  said  two  white  men,  and  both  had  guns  ! 

Thinking  the  neighborhood  rather  unhealthy,  I  bade  the 
boy  good-by,  and  pushed  off  into  the  river.  I  crossed,  a  lit- 
tle lower  down,  a  curve,  which  concealed  me  from  the  mill, 
and,  lower  still,  saw  the  other  saw-mill.  The  river  then 
widened  to  nearly  a  mile  ;  and  I  hoped,  by  keeping  closely 
to  the  left  bank,  to  pass  unseen.  I  could  distinguish  two  or 
three  men  standing  by  the  great  wheel  of  the  mill;  but 
they  looked  small  and  indistinct :  so  I  paddled  along  coolly, 
that  they  might,  in  case  they  had  a  glass,  see  nothing  sus- 
picious in  my  movements. 

I  had  gone  about  half  a  mile,  when  I  heard  peculiar 
sounds,  like  the  far-off  thump  of  oars,  and,  turning,  saw 
a  large  boat  emerging  from  the  vicinity  of  the  mill.  It 
was  too  distant  to  distinguish  who  was  in  it ;  but  I  had  little 
doubt  the  men  at  the  mill  had  seen  and  were  pursuing  me. 
The  river  at  that  point  was  very  shallow ;  and  I  could  not 
reach  the  shore  without  abandoning  the  canoe,  and  wading 
some  distance.      This  I  did  not  like  to  do;  for  it  would 


136  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

render  suspicion  certainty,  and  force  me  to  abandon  the  boat 
in  which  I  was  making  such  good  headway. 

I  decided  to  paddle  rapidly  down  stream  until  I  came  to  a 
good  landing,  and  then  to  haul  up,  and  wait  for  develop- 
ments. My  chance  of  escape  on  land  would,  of  course,  be 
much  better  than  on  water.  I  paddled  with  all  my  strength, 
making  the  water  foam  at  the  bow  and  sides  of  my  clumsy 
friend ;  but,  as  I  was  gliding  swiftly  along,  I  put  a  little  too 
much  muscle  on  the  paddle,  and  it  broke  in  two.  My  heart 
sunk ;  for  the  other  paddle  was  so  clumsy,  I  could  scarcely 
handle  it.  I  tried  it,  however,  and,  putting  forth  all  my 
strength,  managed  to  keep  the  canoe  along.  Not  far  ahead 
was  a  rocky  bluff;  and  there  I  determined  to  land.  With 
great  effort  I  reached  the  shore,  and,  hastily  fastening  the 
canoe,  took  my  bread,  and,  climbing  the  steep  banks,  se- 
creted myself  behind  a  tree,  not  so  much  to  be  out  of  sight, 
as  to  avoid  any  shot  which  might  be  sent  after  me. 

The  boat  drew  rapidly  nearer,  and  I  eagerly  scanned  its 
crew  and  lading.  A  large  pile  of  tobacco-boxes  was  along 
nearly  its  whole  length.  Two  negroes  were  pushing  it  with 
poles;  one  rowing  with  great  sweeps,  and  another  steering 
with  a  long  rudder.  Seeing  no  white  men  on  board,  I  hailed 
the  negroes,  and  asked  if  any  one  had  noticed  me  back  at 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  137 

the  mill,  and  if  they  were  going  to  bother  me.  They  an- 
swered no ;  but  that  I  had  better  keep  still,  as  soldiers  were 
coming  down  on  the  next  boat.  This  was  startling  informa- 
tion ;  and  I  asked  what  the  soldiers  were  in  pursuit  of. 
They  answered,  nothing ;  only  guarding  the  boat,  which  had 
powder  aboard.  I  now  took  their  advice,  and  kept  still ;  for 
the  boat  had  been  going  all  the  time,  and  the  negroes  were 
out  of  hearing. 

Before  long,  I  heard  the  next  boat  approaching  rapidly. 
As  it  passed,  I  saw  half  a  dozen  soldiers  lounging  about, 
and  the  same  number  of  negroes  propelling  the  boat.  They 
did  not  notice  my  canoe,  and  kept  on  about  their  business. 
When  they  were  far  enough  away,  I  re-embarked,  being 
determined  to  reach  Hicoe  Fall  by  daylight.  It  was,  I 
thought,  so  near,  it  would  be  foolish  to  wait  until  night,  and 
then  go  the  short  intervening  distance,  and  wait  again  for 
daylight.  I  crossed  over  to  the  left  bank,  which  I  had  all 
along  avoided  (the  Richmond  and  Danville  Railroad  being 
on  that  side,  and  running  close  to  the  river  for  a  long  dis- 
tance) ;  because,  if  I  had  to  leave  my  canoe,  I  purposed 
taking  to  the  comparatively  untravelled  North-Carolina  side. 
I  knew,  however,  I  must  be  below  where  the  railroad  left  the 
river,  and  also  remembered  that  the  negro  I  had  last  seen 


138  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

told  me  I  could  better  cross  on  the  left  side  :  so  I  crossed 
over.  I  had  a  great  dread  of  the  foil,  and  wanted  to  get 
the  fullest  information  about  it.  Coming  to  some  large 
canoes  and  flat-boats  fastened  to  the  shore,  and  seeing  a  path 
leading  up  over  the  bank,  I  landed  to  reconnoitre.  Leaving 
my  boat  among  the  others,  I  went  up  the  bank.  It  was 
thickly  overgrown  with  high  weeds ;  and  at  its  summit  an 
immense  cornfield  spread  out  before  me,  in  which  twenty 
negroes,  men  and  women,  were  at  work  gathering  the  ears. 
I  made  signs  to  them  from  the  edge  of  the  weeds ;  and  they 
saw  me,  but  acted  queerly.  One  young  fellow  started  to 
come  to  me,  and  then  went  back  again.  Thinking  they 
would  come  presently,  I  went  down  the  bank  to  see  if  the 
boat  was  all  right,  and  then  returned,  making  some  little 
noise. 

The  negroes  were  still  at  work  in  the  field ;  and,  knowing 
there  was  some  good  reason  why  they  had  not  answered  my 
summons,  I  was  on  my  guard,  and,  looking  about  the  country 
as  if  very  much  interested  in  the  landscape,  suddenly  caught 
sight  of  the  most  villanous-looking  face  I  ever  laid  eyes  on. 
It  was  a  short,  strong-looking  man,  with  an  immense  grisly 
beard  and  wolfish  gray  eyes.  I  saw  this  in  an  instant,  as 
I  did  not  let  my  eyes  rest  on  him,  but  pretended  not  to 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  139 

see  him.  He  stood  just  in  tlie  edge  of  the  weeds,  and 
was  watching  me  like  a  cat.  Looking  coolly  about  for  a 
moment  or  two  longer,  and  taking  no  more  notice  of  the 
negroes  or  of  the  man  than  if  they  had  been  so  many  bushes, 
I  started  back  to  the  canoe  as  if  I  had  plenty  of  time,  and 
nothing  on  my  mind.  I  half  expected  every  moment  to 
feel  a  bullet  in  uncomfortable  proximity  with  my  ribs ;  but, 
stepping  into  the  canoe,  I  paddled  oif  with  an  absent  air. 
My  aim  was  to  disarm  suspicion,  and  I  must,  have  succeeded. 

The  man  was,  no  doubt,  the  overseer  of  the  ijegroes,  and, 
as  he  sat  close  to  the  bushes,  probably  did  not  see  me  until  I 
came  up  the  bank  the  second  time.  I  did  nothing  at  that 
time  to  betray  my  true  character ;  and  he  probably  took  it  for 
granted  that  I  was  all  right.  I  was  little  more  than  a  rod 
from  him ;  but  I  governed  my  features  so  well,  that  he  did 
not  read  them.  The  fact  of  the  soldiers  having  just  gone  by 
in  the  boat  probably  aided  me,  as  he  would  naturally  sup- 
pose they  had  seen  me.  I  felt  very  anxious,  however,  and 
momentarily  expected  to  see  that  ugly  face,  backed  by  a 
rifle,  peering  through  the  bushes  on  the  bank  ;  but  I  trusted 
to  luck,  and  it  did  not  fail  me. 

I  soon  heard  the  roar  of  the  falls,  and  prepared  for  a  new 
and  severe  ordeal.     Far  down  the  river  I  saw  a  point  of 


140  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

land,  and  concluded  it  was  the  head  of  the  island,  to  the  left 
of  which  I  must  go  to  avoid  the  most  dangerous  rapids.  On 
drawing  nearer,  it  proved  to  be  what  I  thought,  and  soon 
afterwards  I  came  to  the  passage  ;  but  the  point  of  the  island 
still  hid  tHe  other  and  main  portion  of  the  river. 

The  sight  was  not  assuring.  Far  down  as  I  could  see,  the 
river  was  boiling  and  leaping  over  the  ragged  rocks,  which 
showed  their  black  backs  in  a  whirpool  of  tormented  water. 
It  was  too  late  to  retreat;  and,  bracing  myself  for  the  en- 
counter, I  went  on.  I  tried  to  guide  the  boat,  but  might  as 
well  have  tried  to  guide  a  balloon.  It  went  leaping  and 
plunging  along  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then  was  high  on 
a  rock,  half  full  of  water ;  my  bread  and  blanket  swimming 
about  its  bottom  like  corked  bottles  in  an  ocean. 

I  put  my  "traps"  in  the  bow,  which  was  comparatively 
dry,  and  then  tried  with  the  setting-pole  to  push  the  canoe 
off  into  the  stream.  It  would  not  move  an  inch.  I  must 
have  been  a  comical  spectacle ;  but  I  was  really  in  a  danger- 
ous predicament.  I  could  not  get  ashore  by  wading  or  swim- 
ming :  if  I  had  attempted  it,  I  should  have  been  bruised  to 
death  in  a  moment  on  the  ragged  rocks.  I  could  not  remain 
where  I  was,  and  the  only  thing  I  could  do  I  did.  Strip- 
ping off  all  my  clothing,  and  keeping  a  firm  hold  of  the 


INLAND   NAVIGATION.  141 

side  of  the  canoe,  I  slid  into  the  water.  It  was  very  cold, 
and  chilled  me  through  and  through ;  but  I  l^raced  myself 
against  the  rock,  and,  lifting  and  heaving  with  all  my 
strength,  soon  started  the  canoe  a  little.  It  was  hung  on  a 
breaker  three  or  four  feet  long,  and  just  about  in  the  centre, 
so  that  the  water,  rushing  against  either  end,  held  it  firmly 
braced  in  its  position.  I  had  to  destroy  its  balance ;  and 
then  the  preponderance  of  water  on  one  end  would  carry  it 
off  into  the  current.  I  heaved  again  and  again,  and  at  last 
the  boat  began  to  swing  slowly  round.  I  sprang  in  ;  and  in 
another  moment  we  were  dashing  and  tumbling  about  again 
in  the  mad  stream,  and  then — whack  !  — were  high  and  dry 
on  another  rock.  Again  I  got  the  boat  clear,  and  again  it  was 
fast.  I  was  fearful  that,  notwithstanding  its  very  thick  bot- 
tom and  sides,  it  would  be  smashed  to  atoms  :  but  it  was  the 
only  way ;  and,  after  a  moment's  delay,  I  heaved  it  off 
again,  first  scooping  out  the  surplus  water. 

After  a  half  a  mile  or  more  of  this  kind  of  navigation,  I 
came  at  last  into  smooth  water,  and  sat  down  completely 
exhausted,  but  very  thankful.  Resting  a  while,  I  wrung  the 
water  from  my  clothes,  which  were  drifting  about  in  the  bot- 
tom of  the  canoe,  and  spread  them  out  to  dry.  In  a  little 
while  I  put  them  on,  though  they  were  still  uncomfortably 


142  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

wet.  I  tliougbt  then  I  was  entitled  to  something  to  eat, 
and,  opening  iny  bag  of  provisions,  made  a  licarty  meal,  feel- 
ing very  iiappy  that  I  had  surmounted  all  the  difficulties 
which  had  looked  so  formidable  at  the  outset. 

As  I  had  got  along  so  well  thus  far  in  the  daylight,  I 
determined  to  keep  on  so  as  to  pass  Clarksville  in  the  night- 
time. It  was  a  beautiful  day ;  and,  in  spite  of  my  fatigue, 
I  enjoyed  the  journey.  All  along  the  river  I  had  seen 
numerous  flocks  of  wild-duck  :  but  to-day  they  filled  the  air, 
and  were  continually  flying  out  from  the  little  sheltered  coves 
in  front  of  me  ;  some  of  them  not  taking  the  trouble  to  fly, 
but  swimming  off  into  mid-river.  Large  flocks  of  geese 
also  passed  up  the  river.  They  flew  very  low ;  and  some  of 
them,  not  observing  me,  came  so  near  that  I  could  see  their 
eyes.  When  they  observed  me,  they  would  sweep  off  with 
a  loud  whu-r,  but  soon  afterwards  would  return  to  the  course 
of  the  river.  If  I  had  had  a  gun,  I  could  have  filled  the 
boat. 

The  scenery  was  wild  and  beautiful ;  and,  as  I  saw  but 
few  signs  of  inhabitants,  my  mind  was  at  ease,  and  I  enjoyed 
it.  I  met  two  boats  coming  up.  I  put  the  width  of  the  river 
between  us ;  but  they  were  having  hard  work  to  make  head- 
way against  the  stream,  and  were  content  to  mind  their  own 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  143 

business.  They  made  very  slow  progress  against  the  rapid 
current.  Placing  a  long  pole  firmly  on  the  river  bottom, 
the  men  walked  from  bow  to  stern ;  the  pole  resting  on 
their  shoulders,  and  held  firmly  in  their  hands.  Then  they 
dragged  the  pole  back  to  the  bow,  and  repeated  the  process. 
As  I  floated  easily  along  past  them,  I  thanked  my  stars  that 
I  was  not  obliged  to  return  up  river. 

I  had  made  rapid  progress,  and  towards  evening,  seeing 
some  houses  on  the  right  bank,  concluded  to  pull  up,  and 
reconnoitre.  It  was  about  sunset.  Ascending  the  right 
bank,  I  heard  a  boy  calling  cattle  not  far  off.  I  could  not 
see  him ;  and  an  open  plain  was  between  us,  which  it  was  not 
prudent  to  cross  until  after  dark.  A  building  was  in  sight ; 
but  there  were  no  signs  of  life  a]}out  it.  At  last,  it  being 
sufQciently  dark,  I  started  out.  The  building  proved  to  be 
a  tobacco-barn,  although  it  could  not  have  been  made  for 
that  purpose.  It  was  empty,  and  therefore  of  no  account 
to  me. 

Scouting  about,  I  soon  came  Uj_]iiOn  a  cart-road,  and,  follow- 
ing it  for  half  a  mile,  stumbled  upon  a  grove  of  straw-stacks. 
I  decided  to  go  no  farther,  and,  gathering  a  large  armful  of 
ihQ  straw,  went  back  to  my  canoe.  Putting  the  straw  in  the 
bows,  I  tried  to  get  a  nap,  but,   though  very  tired,  could 


144  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE 

not  get  the  town  of  Clarksville  ont  of  my  bead ;  and  at  last 
decided  to  let  the  canoe  drift  down,  and  await  developments. 
I  dozed  a  little,  and  probably  had  gone  a  mile  or  more,  when 
I  heard  voices  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  A  cold  gray 
fog  was  on  the  water,  and  nothing  could  be  distinguished  at 
a  boat's-length.  I  pulled  in  towards  the  shore,  and,  di'ag- 
ging  my  canoe  up  on  the  land  so  it  would  stay  fast,  quietly 
climbed  the  bank. 

Near  by  were  stables,  cow-barns,  and  cabins;  and  the 
voices  were  evidently  those  of  negroes  at  work  in  and  near 
the  stables.  I  walked  about  among  the  buildings;  but,  as  it 
was  dark,  the  negroes  did  not  distinguish  me  from  them- 
selves. Feeling  satisfied  that  all  was  safe,  I  returned  to  the 
boat,  and,  fastening  it  firmly,  went  back  to  the  buildings. 
I  button-holed  one  of  them,  and,  though  he  was  somewhat 
astonished  and  frightened,  made  him  understand  who  and 
what  I  was.  I  told  him  I  was  suffering  from  cold  and 
fatigue,  and  wanted  to  get  by  a  fire.  He  led  me  into  a 
squalid  cabin,  where  half  a  dozen  negroes  were  crouching 
over  the  hearth.  They  were  very  poorly  clad  and  degraded- 
looking  ;  by  far  the  worst  I  had  seen  in  the  South.  They 
told  me  their  master's  name  was  Skipper,  and  that  he  was 
a  very  hard  man.     The  place  was  an  island,  formed  by  a 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  145 

cut-off  from  the  Dan  into  the  Staunton  River,  which  I  had 
passed  in  the  darkness. 

The  negroes  were  not  allowed  to  leave  the  island ;  and  one 
young  fellow  lay  on  the  floor,  sick  from  a  severe  whipping 
which  he  had  received  for  going  to  Clarksville  the  previous 
Sunday.  He  showed  me  his  back,  still  raw  from  the  cuts  of 
the  lash.  I  was  too  weary  to  notice  much,  and  what  I 
remember  of  that  nio;ht  seems  now  some  terrible  nio;htmare. 
But  one  pleasant  thing  I  do  remember ;  and  that  is  the  pa- 
tient, quick  obedience  of  a  young  gu'l  named  Marie  to  her 
mother's  and  brother's  imperative  commands.  Marie  was 
the  best  looking  of  them  all,  and  she  seemed  some  black 
spirit.  She  had  very  large,  wistful  brown  eyes,  and  kept 
them  fixed  steadily  on  me,  except  when  I  looked  at  her,  and 
then  she  timidly  looked  away.  The  old  woman  gave  me 
some  sour  milk  and  a  piece  of  corn-bread;  and  eating  it, 
and  the  old  negro  woman  bringing  me  some  old  coats  for  pil- 
low and  covering,  I  threw  myself  down  by  the  young  fellow 
who  had  been  whipped,  and  tried  to  sleep. 

But   my   sleep   was   broken    and   troubled.     I   dreamed 

frightful  dreams,   and   can  now  scarcely  separate   the  real 

from  the  unreal.     Whenever  I  awoke,  the  large  black  eyes 

of  Marie  were  fixed  on  me ;  the  gu-l  herself  seeming  to  have 

10 


146  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

no  idea  of  sleep.  Near  morning,  one  of  the  men  roused  me, 
and  said,  "You  muss  be  gwine,  massa."  They  told  me 
there  were  bad  falls  at  Clarksville,  about  two  miles  below, 
which  it  would  be  difficult  to  pass.  I  should  have  gone 
into  the  cut-off,  and  through  it  to  the  Staunton  River,  which 
joined  the  Dan  at  Clarksville.  I  inquired  if  it  would  be 
possible  to  make  my  way  back  to  the  cut-off,  and  they  said  it 
would  be  hard  to  do  it  alone ;  but,  if  I  had  :i  light  cance,  it 
might  bo  done.  I  decided  to  make  the  trial,  and,  bidding 
them  good-by,  started.  By  their  reckoning,  the  cut-off  was 
not  more  than  half  a  mile  away.  I  made  scarcely  any  head- 
way, though  1  exerted  all  my  strength.  The  current  ran 
very  rapidly;  and  I  had  to  keep  stopping  and  resting,  holding 
on  to  the  bank  as  I  did  so,  to  prevent  the  boat  being  swept 
down  the  stream.  At  last,  after  going  some  distance,  I 
landed,  and  walked  up  the  bank  to  see  how  things  looked. 
Not  far  up  the  river  I  saw  the  cut-off,  and,  taking  note  of 
the  proper  way  of  entering  it,  returned  to  the  canoe.  The 
fog  was  still  very  thick ;  but  the  increasing  light  showed  it 
would  shortly  be  day.  I  soon  gained  the  wished-for  channel, 
and  glided  easily  and  rapidly  down  its  current. 

The  mist  was  too  thick  to  allow  me  to  distinguish  when  I 
entered   Staunton  River;  but   the   appearance   of  the   fog 


INLAND  NAVIGATION.  147 

soon  told  that  the  suu  was  rising :  and  not  long  afterward 
the  mist  and  vapor  grew  thinner,  and  then  swept  entirely 
away,  showing  the  sun  about  an  hour  high.  The  morning 
was  a  beautiful  one,  and  I  felt  its  invigorating  influence,  lift- 
ino-  fear  and  anxiety  from  my  mind,  as  the  sun  was  lifting 
the  fog  from  the  river.  I  hugged  the  left  bank  to  keep 
within  the  shadow  of  the  willows,  because  the  bright  sun, 
shining  directly  up  the  river,  almost  blinded  me ;  and  I  saw 
but  one  person, — a  negro, — pushing  a  canoe  up  river  on 
the  opposite  side.  He  waved  his  hat,  and  hallooed ;  but  I 
did  not  see  fit  to  notice  him.  At  that  distance,  he  probably 
took  me  for  one  of  his  own  color,  I  being  in  the  shadow  of 
the  trees. 

Soon  after  this  I  heard  the  roar  of  the  fall  on  the  other  side 
of  the  island,  and  knew  I  was  near  to  Clarksville.  I  passed 
a  magnilicent  place  on  the  left  bank,  —  a  large,  handsome 
mansion,  painted  white,  and  surrounded  by  neat  outbuildings, 
with  a  beautiful  lawn  of  several  acres  sloping  gently  down 
to  the  river.  The  scene  reminded  me  of  pictures  I  had  seen 
of  the  manor-houses  of  England.  Turning  soon  a  slight 
curve  in  the  river,  I  saw,  a  long  distance  down,  the  high  stone 
pillars  of  what  had  once  been  a  bridge  ;  and  this,  I  had  been 
told,   was  at   Clarksville.     Keeping  on,   I   soon  observed, 


148  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

some  distance  this  side  of  the  piers,  a  little  house  on  the  left 
bank,  and,  near  by,  indications  of  a  ferry.  I  crossed  over, 
and,  approaching  the  house,  caught  sight  of  a  negro  man, 
woman,  and  child  in  the  doorway.  I  beckoned  to  the  man, 
and  he  came  down  to  the  landing.  I  explained  to  him  in  a 
very  few  words  who  I  was,  and  what  I  wanted ;  and  ho  told 
me  to  drop  silently  down  the  river,  hide  my  canoe,  and  then 
cautiously  make  my  way  back  to  the  house.  I  did  as 
directed,  leaving  my  things  in  the  boat;  and  that  was  the 
last  I  ever  saw  of  the  wooden  friend  who  had  served  me  so 
faithfully. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


OVERLAND  TRAVEL. 


THE  woman  cooked  me  a  breakfast  of  fried  eggs,  sweet- 
potatoes,  pumpkin-musli,  and  hot  cakes  ;  and  I  com- 
menced a  good  meal :  but  she  soon  grew  nervous,  and  took 
me  and  the  breakfast  into  a  back  room.  She  went  out,  and 
I  was  eating  and  enjoying  myself  there  mightily ;  when  she 
came  in  again,  and,  snatching  away  my  food,  said  with  a  look 
of  indignation,  "  What  you  got  in  dar,  — in  de  boat  down 
in  de  riber  ?  " 

I  knew  she  referred  to  my  bag  of  bread ;  and  I  felt  rather 
mean,  but  soon  explained  that  I  was  laying  up  something 
for  a  rainy  day.  This  somewhat  mollified  her  ;  and  she  gave 
me  the  breakfast  again,  and  soon  afterwards  seemed  to  be 
restored  to  good  humor. 

While  I  was  eating  in  the  front  room,  the  man  had,  in 
talking,  put  a  new  idea  into  my  head.  He  said  I  could  not 
possibly  navigate  the  river,  as  there  were  many  bad  falls  be- 
low Clarksville  which  could   not  be  passed  in   the   canoe. 

149 


150  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

He  also  told  me,  —  what  I  considered  of  more  importance, 
—  that,  about  a  mile  down  the  river,  a  road  led  directly 
from  Clarksviile  to  Petersburg.  It  was  an  old  plank-road ; 
and  I  could  not  lose  my  way  upon  it,  and  would  have  to 
pass  but  two  towns,  — Boydtown  and  Dinwiddle. 

I  was  elated  by  this  information,  and  decided  to  change 
my  route,  —  not  to  go  down  to  Gaston,  but  up  by  the  plank- 
road  to  near  Petersburg,  and  then  to  strike  off  to  the  right 
towards  our  army,  governing  my  particular  movements  by 
circumstances.  The  man  advised  me  to  leave  the  canoe  with 
him ;  and  I  decided  to  do  so,  first,  however,  questioning  him 
closely  to  learn  how  much  his  advice  was  influenced  by  a 
desii-e  for  the  boat.  I  concluded  that  he  was  honest,  and 
decided  to  trust  him.  He  said  I  had  better  hide  in  a  thicket 
near  by  until  nightfall,  when  he  would  direct  me  to  the 
road. 

I  remained  all  day  in  a  dense  woods,  sleeping  a  part  of  the 
time.  The  day  seemed  very  long ;  and,  even  when  sunset 
came,  I  thought  it  would  never  grow  dark.  As  soon  as  it 
was  safe  to  emerge  from  my  hiding-place,  I  went  to  where 
the  negro  was  chopping  wood,  and  asked  if  I  could  go  into 
the  house;  and  he  said,  "Not  yet,  but  pretty  soon."  Re- 
turning to  the  woods,  I  waited  patiently ;  and  after  a  while, 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  151 

the  negro  calling  me,  I  entered  the  house,  and  the  woman 
gave  me  supper.  I  did  not  feel  at  all  diffident  about  taking 
it,  as  my  canoe  was  worth  many  times  as  much.  The  man 
said,  if  any  one  asked  him  how  he  came  by  it,  he  should  say 
he  had  found  it  floating  down  the  river. 

He  knew  John  Randolph,  and  promised  to  tell  him  I 
had  come  thus  far  in  safety,  and  was  still  in  good  spirits. 
Then,  making  my  blanket  and  bag  into  a  convenient  roll,  I 
set  out  along  the  river-bank  to  find  the  road,  which  the 
negro  said  was  about  a  mile  lower  down.  Going  on  at  a 
brisk  pace,  I  soon  saw  a  bright  light  ahead,  on  a  road  sloping 
up  from  the  river.  A  negro  man  was  sitting  by  the  fire.  I 
did  not  like  to  go  within  the  circle  of  light ;  so  I  whistled, 
and  he  started  up,  and  came  slowly  and  doubtfully  to- 
wards me.  I  soon  re-assured  him,  and  then  asked  some 
questions  about  the  road.  His  answers  tallied  with  the  other 
man's,  and  satisfied  me  I  was  on  the  right  route.  He  also 
knew  John  Randolph ;  and  I  asked  him  to  tell  him  about  my 
having  got  along  so  well.  I  thought,  if  Randolph  knew  it, 
it  would  encourage  him  to  do  for  others  what  he  had  done  for 
me.  The  man,  when  I  first  saw  him,  was  reading  a  news- 
paper, which  he  obligingly  gave  me,  saying,  that,  if  he  was 
at  home,  he  could  give  me  others.     Soon  afterwards  I  started 


152  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

on  my  way,  the  negro  accompanying  me  a  half-mile  or  so, 
and  cheering  me  with  every  encouraging  word  he  could  think 
of.  He  was  a  tall,  smart-looking  fellow,  and  one  of  t\iQ  very 
few  slaves  I  had  seen  who  could  read.  He  said  there  were 
mile-posts  all  along  the  road  to  Petersburg,  eighty-three 
miles.  The  town  of  Boydtown  was  twelve  miles  distant. 
Shaking  me  cordially  by  the  hand,  he  at  last  bade  me  good- 
by,  and  I  pushed  forward. 

A  good  many  of  the  mile-posts  were  gone ;  but  those  that 
were  left  gave  me  great  encouragement,  for  they  enabled  me 
to  measure  my  progress.  I  passed  through  Boydtown  about 
eleven  o'clock.  The  lights  were  not  out,  and  I  could  see 
it  had  a  fine  college ;  at  least  one,  which  looked  fine  by 
moonlight.  The  grounds  seemed  well  laid  out,  and  the 
appearance  of  the  whole  was  quite  Northern.  The  dogs 
barked  fiercely  as  I  passed  through  the  wide  street ;  but  none 
actually  molested  me. 

I  had  gone  only  about  fifteen  miles,  when  I  became  so 
tired  that  I  could  go  no  farther.  I  had  been  driving  my- 
self for  some  time ;  but  then  my  will  gave  out,  and  I  laid 
down  right  in  the  road,  and  slept  soundly.  After  a  while,  I 
awoke,  and,  starting  again,  walked  about  seven  miles,  though 
my  feet  dragged  heavily  for  the  last  two  or  three.      Then 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  153 

I  laid  down  again,  and  had  another  short  nap;  and  then 
got  up  again,  and  went  on  about  six  miles  more.  Day 
was  now  breaking;  and  finding  a  fallen  oak,  which,  hav- 
ing its  leaves  on,  offered  a  good  hiding-place,  I  stretched  my- 
self under  it,  and  when  the  sun  was  well  risen,  and  it  had 
grown  somewhat  warm,  had  a  refreshing  sleep.  Some  time 
in  the  afternoon  I  awoke,  and  after  a  frugal  meal  from  a  shce 
of  bread,  and  a  shred  of  meat,  went  off  on  a  scouting  tour, 
keeping  in  the  dii-ection  of  Petersburg,  but  not  going  too 
near  the  road.  I  found  some  persimmons,  which  tasted  very 
nicely ;  but  my  stomach  sympathized  with  the  fatigue  of  my 
legs,  and  they  made  me  sick  for  an  hour  or  more. 

I  kept  on  slowly  through  the  woods,  and  towards  night 
tried  to  find  some  negro  of  whom  I  could  obtain  information, 
but,  finding  none,  at  last  stretched  myself  under  a  fence 
close  to  the  road.  Presently  a  white  and  a  black  boy  came 
along,  driving  a  herd  of  swine.  The  presence  of  the  white 
boy  obliged  me  to  keep  still ;  but  soon  one  of  the  herd  came 
tearing  back,  with  the  negro  boy  running  and  shouting  after 
it.  I  showed  myself  to  the  boy,  and  beckoned  to  him.  He 
*was  too  much  engaged  with  the  obstinate  hog  to  notice  me ; 
and  I  felt  decidedly  cut  when  he  ran  off  again  without  even 
a  word. 


154  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

I  then  set  out  along  the  road,  although  it  was  not  quite 
dark,  and  had  gone  only  a  short  distance,  when  I  met  a  negro. 
I  asked  him  a  few  questions,  but  did  not  tell  him  I  was  a 
Yankee ;  and  yet,  after  talking  a  few  minutes,  he  asked  me 
if  I  was  not.  I  was  somewhat  taken  aback  by  the  question, 
but  acknowledged  the  fact.  He  detected  me  by  my  voice. 
He  said  he  had  just  passed  a  negro  going  in  my  direction,  and, 
if  I  hurried,  I  should  catch  up  with  him  before  he  reached  the 
river.  I  asked  what  river ;  and  he  said  the  Meheria,  and 
that  farther  up,  near  Dinwiddle,  I  should  cross  the  Nottaway. 
I  inquired  if  there  were  any  guards  at  these  rivers ;  and  he 
said  he  didn't  know  about  the  Nottaway,  but  there  were 
none  at  the  Meheria.  Leaving  the  negro,  I  started  on  a  run 
after  the  other  man,  but  soon  concluded  he  had  too  much  the 
start  of  me,  and  slackened  my  pace  to  a  walk. 

Presently  I  came  to  a  place  where  a  couple  of  trees  had 
been  felled  across  the  highway,  and  the  travel  turned  off  to 
the  right.  I  did  not  like  to  leave  the  path,  as  I  had  grown 
weary  of  travelling  on  branch  and  doubtful  roads  :  so  I  kept 
right  on  over  the  trees,  thinking  that  some  small  bridge  might 
be  gone,  and  I  should  soon  come  upon  the  travelled  route' 
again.  The  negroes  had  positively  assured  me  there  was  a 
plank-road  all  the  way  to  Petersburg,  and  only  one :  so  I 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  155 

felt  sure  of  coming  out  right  if  I  followed  the  planks.  I 
kept  on  quite  a  distance,  and  at  last  came  to  the  end  of  the 
road ;  at  least  to  an  end,  if  not  the  end ;  for  an  immense  ravine 
nearly  or  quite  a  hundred  feet  deep,  and  three  or  four  hun- 
dred feet  wide,  was  before  me,  half  hidden  by  the  dark- 
ness. A  stream  of  water  ran  through  it,  and  I  could  distin-' 
guish  some  signs  of  a  bridge  nearly  gone  to  decay. 

I  disliked  to  go  all  the  way  back  to  where  the  road  forked, 
and  decided  to  creep  along  the  river's  bank  until  I  came  to 
the  new  brido-e,  whose  outlines  I  thou2;ht  I  could  then  dis- 
cern  far  down  the  river.  I  walked  on  through  the  high  grass 
and  weeds  thickly  covered  with  dew,  keeping  near  the  edge 
of  the  bluff,  which  presently  sloped  down  to  only  a  slight 
bank.  Soon  I  came  to  a  road,  which  I  judged  was  the  one 
I  had  left  behind  at  the  fork.  I  followed  the  road  down  to 
the  stream ;  and,  lo  !  there  was  no  bridge.  The  one  I  had 
seen  was  an  illusion.  No  alternative  presenting  itself,  I  laid 
aside  my  clothes,  and  waded  into  the  ice-cold  water.  When 
I  reached  the  other  bank,  I  was  chilled  and  very  uncomfort- 
able ;  and,  while  putting  on  my  clothes,  the  cold  night-aii 
struck  right  through  me. 

I  found  a  perfect  snarl  of  roads  on  the  farther  side  of  ths; 
river,  and,  taking  one  which  looked  lilie  the  one  I  had  left, 


156  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

walked  forward.  As  I  went  on,  the  road  grew  less  and 
less  like  the  other ;  but  I  determined  not  to  turn  back  until 
sure  I  was  wrong :  so  T  kept  on  about  three  miles,  when  I 
came  to  a  house  and  outbuildings.  I  scouted  round  among 
the  latter  to  find  a  negro  cabin,  but,  finding  none  that  was  not 
deserted,  cautiously  reconnoitred  the  house.  It  was  not  a 
pretentious  building ;  and  some  beams  were  placed  against  its 
shutters  and  doors,  apparently  as  fastenings. 

I  went  round  to  its  farther  side,  and,  after  a  few  minutes' 
hesitation,  knocked  on  the  door.  No  answer.  I  repeated  the 
sununons;  and  soon  a  woman's  voice  called  out,  "Who  is 
thar?"  Giving  my  speech  the  Southern  drawl,  I  told  her 
a  soldier,  on  the  way  from  Clarksville  to  Petersburg,  who 
had  lost  himself  back  on  the  Meheria  River. 

She  said  she  was  sorry,  and  told  me  that  her  husband  was 
a  soldier  too,  up  at  Petersburg.  She  also  said  that  the  road 
I  was  on  led  to  Lawrenceville  ;  and  where  the  plank-road  was 
she  did  not  know,  but  thought  I  had  better  go  back  to  the 
river,  and  try  to  find  it.  "  These  are  hard  times,"  she 
added,  "for  poor  folks." 

I  assented  feelingly  to  this  remark,  and  thanking  her, 
and  saying  good-night,  started  back  to  the  river.  After 
a  while,  I  got  there,  and,  beating  about  for  a  timQ  in  the  dark- 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  157 

ness,  found  the  plank-road  again.  I  was  rejoiced  to  find  it, 
and,  although  very  tked,  thought  I  would  make  some  head- 
way. I  was  too  tired,  however,  to  go  far,  and  only  went  fifteen 
miles  that  night.  Towards  morning,  T  passed  several  wagon- 
camps.  I  came  upon  them  very  quietly,  and,  walking  on 
with  a  nonchalant  air,  got  by  them  all  about  as  soon  as  seen ; 
no  one  taking  the  trouble  to  follow.  If  the  soldiers  had 
seen  me  before  I  passed,  no  doubt  they  would  have  inter- 
cepted me,  and,  in  that  event,  might  have  discovered  that  I 
was  a  Yankee.  ■» 

Not  finding  a  good  hiding-place,  I  did  not  put  up  until 
sunrise.  Then  I  discovered  a  secluded  spot  near  the  road, 
and,  after  a  bite  of  bread,  rolled  myself  in  my  ragged  blan- 
ket, and  slept  soundly.  I  awoke  somewhat  refi-eshed,  though 
stiff  and  cold.  My  legs  had  not  recovered  from  their  ill 
treatment  at  Hicoe  Falls ;  and  my  knee,  where  the  dog  bit  it, 
pained  me  considerably.  Liberty,  however,  was  before  me ; 
and  no  difficulty  seemed  too  great  to  be  surmounted. 

The  day  was  immeasurably  long ;  and,  growing  impatient, 
I  set  out  about  half  an  hour  before  sunset.  I  passed  two 
houses  by  going  off  the  road  into  some  woods,  and  soon  after 
came  upon  two  negro  women  gathering  pine-knots  for  light- 
wood  from  the  old   planks  of  the  road.     They  were  some 


158  ADRIFT  IN-T)IXIE 

Kttle  distance  apart;  and  I  accosted  the  nearer  one,  and,  after 
taking  her  measure,  trusted  her.  She  could  give  me  little 
information,  but  told  me  not  to  trust  the  other ;  for  she  was 
*'  green."  When  we  joined  the  other,  we  talked  as  if  I  was 
a  Confederate  soldier;  and  she  said,  '*  It  am  a  pity  dat  sech  a 
nice-looking  man  as  you  am  a  sodger."  I  asked  if  a  poor 
soldier  without  money  could  get  any  thing  to  eat  about 
there ;  and  they  said  I  might  at  the  second  house,  but  not  at 
the  first,  for  the  woman  there  was  ten*ibly  stingy.  The  first 
girl  told  me,  that^in  my  costume,  I  had  little  to  fear ;  and 
yet  she  would  not  advise  me  to  travel  by  daylight. 

I  left  them,  and,  coming  to  the  second  house,  marched  into 
the  yard,  and  up  to  the  door,  and  rapped.  A  little  negro 
boy  appeared ;  and  I  asked  him  if  his  mistress  was  about. 
He  said  yes,  and  went  to  call  her.  She  soon  appeared,  — 
an  old  lady,  rather  pinched  in  the  face,  —  and  I  inquired  if 
she  could  let  me  have  something  to  eat.  She  said  she  would 
like  to,  but  had  no  bread  or  meat  cooked.  I  then  asked  for 
some  milk ;  and  she  said  the  morning  milk  was  all  gone,  and 
they  had  not  yet  milked  for  the  evening.  Being  determined 
to  have  something,  I  then  recjuested  her  to  give  me  a  glass  of 
water ;  and  she  directed  the  little  negro  boy  to  bring  it.  I 
thanked  her  very  courteously,  and  she  looked  a  little  ashamed. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  159 

Soon  afterward  I  met  three  ladies  and  a  young  girl  on  the 
road,  and  saluted  them  in  a  style  as  nearly  Southern  as  I  could. 
The  ex23ression  of  surprise  on  their  faces,  however,  told  me 
it  was  not  exactly  the  thing.  I  had  done  my  best,  how- 
ever ;  and,  as  nothing  happened,  it  was  all  well. 

I  soon  came  to  a  house  on  the  left  of  the  highway.  There 
were  trees  between  it  and  me  ;  and,  as  it  stood  back  from  the 
road  some  little  distance,  I  had  ap|>roached  very  near  to  it 
before  I  saw  that  it  was  a  place  of  considerable  resort.  A 
number  of  horses  were  hitched  to  posts  n^r  the  door,  and  a 
number  of  men  were  lounging  about  on  the  veranda.  I 
passed  by  as  unconcernedly  as  I  could,  although  I  expected 
to  be  hailed  every  minute.  I  made  up  my  mind  to  run  if 
I  was,  and  take  to  the  nearest  woods.  No  one  troubled 
me,  however ;  and  I  went  on  much  relieved,  but  anxious  to 
put  as  much  distance  as  possible  between  me  and  the 
mansion. 

Presently  I  came  to  a  place  in  the  road  where  I  could  see 
ahead  some  distance.  A  large  tract  of  cleared  land  was  on 
either  side  of  the  road,  and  several  groups  of  houses.  I 
thought  I  could  distinguish  white  men  at  work  about  the 
nearest  house,  and  concluded  that  I  had  been  careless  long 
enough,  and  must  look  for  some  place  of  concealment.     I 


IGO  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

was  about  starting  back  to  find  some  cover,  when  I  heard 
voices  in  the  direction  from  which  I  had  come.  No  good 
cover  was  near ;  but  I  took  to  the  best,  —  a  narrow  strip  of 
trees  and  bushes  which  grew  between  the  road  I  was  on, 
and  one  which  forked  from  it  just  beyond  me.  I  had  scarce- 
ly got  into  the  bushes,  when  a  herd  of  cattle  came  in  sight. 
They  came  opposite  to  me,  and,  I  suppose,  scented  my  pres- 
ence; for  they  stoppec^  and  stared  at  me  in  a  dreadfully 
aggravating  way.  I  was  afraid  the  men  would  notice  their 
queer  actions,  or  that  persons  in  the  vicinity  would  come  up 
and  discover  me  :  so  I  pelted  them  away  with  sticks,  —  all 
but  one  stupid  steer,  which  showed  fight.  At  last  I  planted  a 
large  stone  between  his  eyes ;  and  he  ran  off  bellowing,  but 
stopping  occasionally  to  look  back,  and  threaten  me  with  his 
horns. 

I  now  watched  the  turn  in  the  road,  and  presently  saw 
coming  along  very  slowly  an  old  woman,  a  girl  of  about 
twenty,  a  very  pretty  younger  girl,  and  a  small  boy.  They 
had  baskets,  and,  I  judged,  had  been  to  let  the  cattle  out  of 
pasture,  and  to  gather  pine-knots,  which  are  used  by  the 
poor  whites  and  negroes  for  candles.  They  sauntered  along 
slowly,  and,  when  opposite  to  me,  stopped  for  several  minutes 
not  ten  feet  away,  and  in  plain  view  of  my  hiding-place. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  161 

They  went  on  a  little  distance,  and  then  returned ;  and  soon 
a  large  portly  man  came  along,  who  called  the  pretty  girl 
Lucy.  I  hugged  the  ground  very  tightly;  for,  though  I 
could  have  overcome  the  whole  party,  the  pursuit  which 
would  have  followed  might  have  proved  serious.  After 
chatting  about  five  minutes,  they  separated,  and  went  their 
ways. 

As  soon  as  they  were  fairly  out  of  sight,  I  went  back  to 
better  cover,  and  waited  until  dark ;  then  started  again,  but 
had  not  gone  far,  when  I  heard  the  sound  of  approaching 
wheels  and  the  tread  of  horsemen.  Hiding  behind  a  pine- 
bush,  I  waited  for  them  to  pass.  There  was  a  buggy  and 
several  mounted  men  riding  before,  and  as  many  mounted 
men  riding  behind,  apparently  as  guard.  I  could  not  see  the 
occupants  of  the  buggy;  but  I  heard  a  scrap  of  their  conver- 
sation. It  referred  to  some  official  order,  but  I  could  not 
hear  just  what.     After  they  had  gone,  I  started  on  again. 

When  I  arrived  at  the  house  where  I  thought  I  had  seen 
white  men  at  work,  I  thought  I  would  look  round  a  little. 
Clambering  over  the  fence,  I  noiselessly  approached  the 
house,  and  saw  lights  within,  and  heard  people  talking. 
I  made  out  the  outline  of  what  appeared  to  be  a  negro  cabin, 
and,  going  to  the  side  farthest  from  the  house,  stepped  up  to 
11 


162  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

the  door,  and  knocked  very  quietly,  the  house  being  very 
near.  A  dog  sprang  up,  and  barked  savagely ;  and  a  young 
negro  girl  opened  the  door,  and  asked  what  I  wanted.  T 
made  signs  to  her  to  be  silent,  and  entered.  A  very  old  man 
was  there,  and  a  very  young  baby.  The  latter  belonged  ap- 
parently to  the  young  gii-1,  although  she  could  not  have  been 
more  than  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old. 

The  old  man  was  deaf,  and  did  not  at  first  understand 
who  or  what  I  was  ;  but,  when  he  did,  he  brightened  up, 
and  his  eye  glistened  with  pleasure.  He  told  me  several 
useful  things,  and  cautioned  me  to  be  careful.  He  said  that 
a  young  man  named  Eandall — a  Yankee,  and  one  of 
Wilson's  raiders  —  had  called  at  this  very  house  (the  white 
folks'),  and,  being  detected  as  a  Yankee,  had  been  turned 
over  to  a  magistrate  by  the  name  of  John  Norrington, 
who,  aided  by  a  mean  white  named  Jeff".  Davis,  took  Ran- 
dall out  to  a  wood  near  by,  stripped  him,  tied  him  to  a  tree, 
and  then  shot  him.  They  threw  his  body  into  a  little  ra- 
vine, and  shovelled  some  dirt  upon  it ;  and  then,  Davis  taking 
his  clothes,  the  two  worthies  returned  to  the  bosoms  of  their 
families.     Both  had  since  gone  as  soldiers  to  Petersburg. 

The  negroes  were  surprised  that  the  dog  did  not  attack 
me.     He  was  a  very  fierce  animal,  and  I  was  tlie  only  stran- 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  163 

ger  he  had  ever  allowed  to  approach  the  house.  I  stretched 
myself  on  the  bed  for  a  few  minutes,  while  the  girl  washed 
and  roasted  some  sweet-potatoes.  Then  I  started  on  again, 
the  girl  regretting  she  could  give  me  no  more  potatoes,  and 
the  old  man  invoking  upon  me  all  sorts  of  blessings.  The 
dog  again  let  me  pass  freely,  and  I  reached  the  road  in  safety. 

I  had  not  gone  far  when  I  heard  the  sounds  of  horses  gal- 
loping towards  me  in  the  distance.  I  was  doubtful  whether 
they  were  pursuing  me  or  not.  No  good  cover  was  near ;  but 
a  house  was  not  far  ahead  :  and,  as  the  horses  drew  near,  I 
sprang  over  the  fence,  and  came  within  a  foot  or  two  of 
jumping  into  a  well.  Creeping  along  the  fence 'a  little  dis- 
tance, I  lay  down  close  to  it,  and  soon  heard  the  horses  go 
by ;  but  it  was  too  dark  to  distinguish  them.  They  stopped 
at  the  gate  of  the  house ;  and  I  heard  them  asking  questions 
of  some  one  who  came  out.  I  was  morally  certain  they  were 
inquu-ing  about  me,  and  cursed  the  impatience  which  had  led 
me  to  expose  myself  in  the  daytime.  After  a  few  minutes, 
they  started  on  again ;  and  the  sound  of  their  horses'  hoofs 
soon  died  away  in  the  distance. 

I  was  anxious  to  find  out  what  the  horsemen  wanted, 
and  thought  there  must  be  a  negro  about  who  would  know 
something  about  it.     I  crept  quietly  up  to  the  building,  and, 


164  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

after  a  thorougli  reconnoissance,  knocked  at  the  door  of  a 
bouse  which  looked  too  good  for  a  negro  tenement.  A 
peep  through  the  logs  showed  me  a  very  tidy,  light-col- 
ored couple ;  the  woman  spinning,  and  the  man  making 
baskets-  The^man  let  me  in,  and  gave  me  a  seat  by  the 
roaring  fire.  On  questioning  him,  he  told  me  that  the  men 
I  had  seen  were  neighbors,  who  had  been  to  the  post-office, 
and,  having  found  a  letter  for  his  mistress,  had  brought  it 
along  and  left  it  on  their  return.  Then  I  knew  that  the  build- 
ing  I  had  passed,  where  the  horses  were  hitched,  was  the 
post-office,  and  all  my  fright  about  the  horsemen  went  for 
nothing. 

The  man  informed  me  it  was  about  seven  miles  to  the 
Nottaway;  but  he  did  not  know  whether  or  not  there  was  a 
guard  at  the  crossing.  However,  he  thought  there  was  one 
at  Dinwiddle,  which  was  only  a  short  distance  beyond.  The 
woman  offered  me  something  to  eat.  I  was  not  hungry,  but 
took  a  sweet-potato  to  carry  with  me.  It  had  just  been  roast- 
ed, and  was  as  useful  as  a  small  stove  in  keeping  me  warm. 

I  set  out  again,  but  had  not  gone  far  before  I  heard  a 
horse  galloping  behind  me,  and  took  cover  in  a  deserted 
blacksmith-shop.  The  horse  and  rider  soon  came  along, 
the  man  singing.     I  thought  I  detected  a  touch  of  the  negro 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  165 

in  his  voice,  and,  when  he  came  up,  scanned  him  as  closely 
as  the  darkness  would  permit.  I  was  a  little  in  doubt,  as  the 
man,  in  that  light,  could  not  be  distinguished  from  a  white 
man;  but,  feeling  a  little  reckless,  stepped  out  into  the 
road  in  front  of  his  horse.  He  pulled  up  suddenly,  and 
asked  what  I  wanted.  I  told  him  I  wanted  to  know  about 
the  road,  and,  if  he  was  not  in  a  hurry,  would  like  to  keep 
him  company  for  a  while.  I  was  now  sure  he  was  in  some 
degree  a  negro,  and,  questioning  him,  learned  that  he  was  a 
freeman,  and  had  a  plantation  of  his  own.  I  did  not  tell 
him  who  I  was,  being  a  little  doubtful  about  free  negroes; 
but  I  sounded  him,  and  was  pretty  well  satisfied  he  would 
not  betray  me ;  but,  as  I  had  learned  all  I  desked  in  the 
character  of  a  Confederate  soldier,  concluded  it  was  useless 
to  trust  him.  Among  other  things,  he  said  that  Wilson's 
raiders  had  pretty  well  "cleaned  him  out"  the  last  sum- 
mer ;  but  he  harbored  no  malice  against  them.  He  said 
there  were  about  forty  thousand  Rebels  just  outside  of 
Petersburg,  on  the  South-side  Kailroad. 

We  went  along  together  for  some  distance,  and  I  learned 
a  great  deal  from  him.  Coming  at  length  to  a  road  which 
led  to  his  place,  he  bade  me  good-night,  at  the  same  time 
pointing  to  a  large  white  house,  a  short  distance  ahead,  as  a 


166  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

Confederate  colonel's,  where  I  would  be  gladly  welcomed 
and  well  treated.  I  did  not  question  the  first  part  of  this 
assurance,  but,  as  to  the  good  "treatment,  had  my  dl^ubts. 

I  trudged  along  the  rough  road,  tripping  over  ruts  and 
planks,  and  stumbling  into  holes  :  it  was  very  tiresome  ;  but 
I  did  not  expect  much  ease.  The  moon  was  obscured  by 
clouds,  and  gave  little  or  no  light ;  and,  a  little  after  mid- 
night, a  terrible  storm  of  wind  and  rain  came  on.  I  could 
find  no  shelter  but  the  trees,  and  was  soon  wet  throuo^h.  The 
wind  howled  among  the  trees,  twisting  and  swaying  them 
about  as  if  they  were  a  host  of  shadowy  demons  engaged  in 
mortal  combat.  I  never  witnessed  so  fierce  a  storm ;  and, 
while  it  lasted,  the  excitement  made  me  forget  all  discomfort. 

The  storm  did  not  continue  more  than  an  hour;  and,  when 
it  was  over,  I  was  utterly  exhausted  ;  and  I  was  somewhat  dis- 
heartened too,  for  I  could  not  see  my  way  clear.  The  negro 
had  told  me  of  large  numbers  of  Rebels  ahead  ;  and  I  knew 
that  I  was  coming  to  a  place  where  my  life  would  be  in  im- 
minent peril.  I  was  cold  also,  and  wet  through ;  and  every 
thing  looked  dark  and  gloomy.  I  remembered  the  neo-ro's 
prayer  for  me,  and  prayed  myself,  not  in  words,  but  in 
thought.     I  really  felt  stronger  and  more  encouraged  after 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  167 

it,  and,  plucking  up  new  spiiit,  walked  on  again  as  briskly 
as  I  could  over  the  rougb,  miry  road. 

The  wagon-camps  soon  became  numerous,  their  fires  gleam- 
ing in  every  little  grove  by  the  roadside.  At  some  of  them 
a  few  men  were  standing  about  the  fires ;  but  the  most  of 
them  were  lying  with  their  feet  to  the  fire,  looking  like  so 
many  mummies,  as  the  firelight  glistened  on  the  brass  plates 
of  their  equipments,  and  on  their  muskets,  which  were  rest- 
ing against  the  trees  and  wagons.  Most  of  the  camps  were 
a  little  distance  from  the  road ;  and,  as  I  went  by  very  qui- 
etly, the  soldiers  did  not  see  me. 

A  little  after  midni.dit,  I  came  to  a  lono;  brido;e,  —  so 
long,  that,  in  the  darkness,  I  could  see  no  end  to  it,  —  and 
was  doubtfal  whether  to  cross  it,  or  to  go  above  or  below, 
ford  the  river,  and  then  come  back  to  the  road  again.  I 
listened  and  looked  intently  for  some  time,  but,  hearing 
and  seeing  nothing,  advanced  on  tip-toe,  with  my  eyes  and 
ears  on  the  alert.  I  had  gone  half-way  over,  when  I  heard 
footsteps  on  the  farther  end  advancing  towards  me.  I  about- 
faced,  and  started  back  as  quietly  and  rapidly  as  possible, 
and  tried  to  find  cover  near  by.  A  road  turned  off  to  the 
right.  Turning  into  it.  I  walked  on  a  little  ways,  and 
crouched  down  behind  a  clump  of  bushes. 


168  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

The  man  turned  into  the  same  road ;  and,  seeing  a  collis- 
ion was  inevitable,  I  made  a  movement  to  better  my  position. 
He  was  just  opposite  to  me,  when  the  gravel  grated  under 
my  foot,  and  he  started  for  the  other  side  of  the  road.  I 
sprang  after  and  collared  him,  but  instantly  let  go  my  hold  ; 
for  no  eye-balls  but  a  darky's  could  show  in  the  dark- 
ness as  his  did.  I  laughed  to  myself,  and  proceeded  to 
calm  the  fears  of  the  ague-stricken  negro,  but  was  rejoiced 
that  the  encounter  had  turned  out  so  comical;  for,  to  be 
entirely  frank,  1  was  a  minute  before  almost  as  badly  fright- 
ened as  he.  He  said  he  had  not  seen  or  heard  me  until 
I  was  just  ready  to  spring  upon  him.  He  thought  at  first  I 
was  a  woman,  but,  when  I  sprang  upon  him,  saw  I  was  a  man. 
He  told  me  that  the  river  was  the  Nottaway  ;  that  no  guards 
were  at  the  bridge ;  and  the  nearest  ones  were  twelve  miles 
away,  at  Dinwiddle  Court  House. 

After  the  fellow  got  over  his  fright,  I  took  a  fancy  to  him, 
and  told  him  every  thing.  He  was  very  much  pleased  when 
he  learned  who  and  what  I  was,  and  asked  me  to  come  to  his 
house,  where  he  could  hide  me  "  mighty  well."  It  was  near 
morning ;  I  could  not  go  much  farther ;  and  so  I  decided  to 
accept  his  hospitality. 

As  we  walked  on  towards  his  house,  he  told  me  his  name 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  169 

was  John  Eandolpla !  I  was  sui-prised  and  pleased,  and 
accepted  the  coincidence  as  a  good  omen.  I  mentioned  the 
other  John  Randolph ;  but  he  did  not  know  him.  He  said 
the  free  negro  I  had  met  a  short  distance  back  was  a  good 
man,  and  would  not  have  harmed  me.  He  knew  of  but  one 
negro  who  would  betray  me  ;  and  his  house  I  had  passed 
long  before :  so  I  need  borrow  no  trouble  on  that  account. 
He  corroborated  the  old  darky's  account  of  the  death  of 
Randall,  relating  it  precisely  as  he  did ;  and  said  that  the 
body  of  a  negro,  a  United-States  soldier,  who  had  escaped 
and  been  recaptured,  was  then  hanging  a  little  beyond  the 
bridge  over  the  Nottaway.  He  offered  me  some  apple- 
brandy, which  I  drank,  finding  it  very  invigorating,  though 
not  very  strong.     It  cost  the  negro  twelve  dollars  a  quart. 

We  had  a  little  conversation  about  the  currency  system, 
and  he  said  that  a  basket  of  chips  would  bring  five  dollars 
in  Confederate  money ;  but,  though  every  thing  commanded 
so  high  a  price,  it  made  little  difierence,  as,  none  wanting  to 
hold  it,  the  money  was  kept  in  pretty  lively  circulation.  He 
also  told  me  there  had  been  more  fighting  in  the  Shenandoah 
Valley;  but  he  could  not  tell  how  it  resulted,  though  be 
thought  the  Yankees  had  the  best  of  it. 

We  soon  arrived  at  the  plantation  where  he  lived.     His 


170  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

own  house  was  neat  and  comfortable,  and  the  mansion-house 
was  a  splendid  building.  We  went  to  the  back  of  the  man- 
sion by  a  di-ive-way,  and  trod  very  quietly ;  for  Coafeder- 
ate  officers  were  quartered  in  the  dwelling.  When  John 
came  to  his  cabin,  he  took  a  key  from  under  the  door,  un- 
locked it,  and  asked  me  to  enter.  His  wife  —  a  light-col- 
ored mulatto  —  and  two  girls  were  sleeping  in  the  room, 
and  the  fire-light  showed  that  they  were  all  quite  pretty. 
John  himself  was  a  good-looking  fellow,  with  mustache  and 
whiskers ;  and  he  had  a  watch,  which  indicated  three,  a.m. 
He  aroused  his  wife ;  and  she  soon  cooked  me  a  good  break- 
fast, with  something  to  carry  with  me  on  the  next  day's  jour- 
ney. 

After  breakfast,  I  set  out  for  a  deserted  tobacco-barn  far 
off  in  the  field,  where  I  was  to  hide  until  nightfall,  when 
John  would  come  for  me.  He  went  along  to  show  me  where 
it  was,  and,  when  we  arrived  there,  made  a  scaffolding  upon 
some  poles,  on  which  I  might  lie  during  the  day. 

It  was  a  cold  morning ;  and  the  wind  shivered  through  the 
chinks  in  the  barn,  and  made  me  very  uncomfortable.  Some 
one  was  firing  a  gun  in  the  woods  nearly  all  the  day ;  but 
the  sound  kept  at  a  respectful  distance,  and  did  not  alarm 
me.     About  nine  in  the  evening,  John  came,  and  made  a 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  171 

little  fire  ;  for  I  was  so  cold,  I  could  hardly  move.  We 
then  went  back  to  the  house,  where  I  got  warmed  nicely. 

John  advised  me  to  turn  off  the  road  this  side  of  Dinwid- 
dle Court  House,  at  a  plantation  which  he  described, 
where  I  should  find  certain  negroes,  who  would  show  me  the 
way  to  the  Weldon  Railroad,  and  guide  me  past  the  Rebel 
pickets,  if  there  were  any.  I  had  anticipated  great  difficulty 
in  passing  the  pickets,  and  was  glad  of  the  least  assistance. 
He  offered  me  some  money  ;  but  I  told  him  I  had  no  need  of 
it :  and  this  reminds  me  that  the  other  John  Randolph,  when 
speaking  of  taking  me  down  to  Gaston,  tendered  me  money. 
He  said  I  should  meet  numbers  of  negroes  on  the  road,  as 
it  was  Saturday  night.  They  would  be  going  to  the  houses 
of  their  wives.  Leaving  my  address,  to  be  given  to  any 
passing  Union  soldier,  I  bade  them  all  a  grateful  good-by, 
and  set  out  again  on  my  journey. 

I  had  not  gone  far  before  I  caught  up  with  an  old  darky, 
who  seemed  anxious  to  keep  me  company ;  but,  not  far  be- 
yond the  bridge,  he  turned  off  upon  a  branch  road,  and  I  was 
left  alone  again.  The  night  was  very  cold ;  and,  to  keep 
warm,  I  had  to  walk  briskly.  When  I  came  near  to  where 
I  thought  the  Dinwiddle  Bridge  should  be,  I  observed  a  large 
mansion  on  the  left,  far  back  from  the  road,  and  heard  some 


172  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

one  near  by  chopping  wood.  I  was  very  cold,  and  longed 
to  sit  by  a  fire  a  little  while :  so  I  went  up  the  drive-way 
leading  to  the  house.  Going  to  the  left,  I  discovered  a  rud- 
dy light  pouring  through  the  chinks  of  a  cabin,  and,  peeping 
in,  saw  three  or  four  negroes  gathered  about  some  blazing 
logs.  Liking  their  looks,  I  rapped  at  the  door.  An  old 
woman  let  me  in,  and  I  took  a  direct  route  to  the  fire. 

Two  mulatto  girls  were  seated  in  the  corner,  and  one  of 
them  was  the  prettiest  I  had  seen  at  the  South.  She  had 
beautiful  brown  hair  and  eyes;  delicate,  regular  features; 
and  was  very  lady-like  in  appearance.  I  was  also  much 
struck  with  her  intelligence.  She  brought  me  a  book,  —  a 
volume  of  "  The  Wide,  Wide  World."  I  had  read  it  when 
a  boy,  and  it  looked  like  an  old  friend.  She  said  she  liked 
it  very  much.  I  told  her  I  wanted  information  of  the  where- 
abouts of  the  Rebels,  and  their  plans ;  and,  going  into  another 
room,  she  called  her  husband. 

When  he  came,  I  thought  of  Shakspeare's  "  Midsummer 
Night's  Dream,"  —  of  Titania  and  her  long-eared  lover. 
He  was  a  stout,  roljust  negro,  as  black  as  midnight,  and,  at 
first  sight,  awfully  homely  ;  but  he  improved  somewhat  on  ac- 
quaintance. He  told  me  a  great  deal  about  the  strength  and 
disposition  of  the  Rebel  forces,  and,  in  the  course  of  conver- 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  173 

sation,  said  that  he  was  an  officer's  servant,  just  returned 
from  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  He  was  at  the  fight  at  Win- 
chester with  his  master,  who  was  then  at  the  house  with  the 
white  folks  and  some  other  soldiers.  I  asked  for  a  pencil, 
and  made  a  few  memoranda  such  as  I  should  understand, 
but  which  could  not  be  deciphered  in  case  I  was  taken. 
I  was  somewhat  amused  at  the  slack  allegiance  which  the 
negro  rendered  his  master.  The  beautiful  girl  brought  me 
a  fine  long  pencil,  which  I  saw  by  the  stamp  was  one  of 
Faber's ;  and,  when  I  got  through,  wanted  to  give  it  to  me. 
I  declined  to  take  it ;  and  then  she  brought  me  two  enor- 
mous red  apples. 

Leaving  my  name  and  address  with  my  new  friends,  I  set 
out  again.  It  was  now  nearly  morning ;  and  I  hastened  on 
so  as  to  reach  before  daylight  the  cabin  John  Randolph  had 
described.  His  description  was  so  definite,  that  I  had  no 
difficulty  in  finding  it.  A  number  of  negro  men  were  there, 
and  one  of  them  was  just  setting  out  in  the  direction  I  wanted 
to  go;  and,  when  he  went,  I  went  with  him.  We  took  an 
almost  imperceptible  foot-path,  using  the  greatest  caution, 
and  crossing  a  creek  on  the  remains  of  a  bridge  which  had 
been  partially  destroyed  by  Wilson's  raiders.  The  man 
pointed  out  a  mill  which  they  had  burned.     He  said  the  dis- 


174  Idrfft  ijv  dixie. 

tance  from  the  plank-road  to  the  Weldon  Raih-oad  was  from 
fifteen  to  eighteen  miles ;  and  from  Clarksville  to  Dinwiddie, 
seventy-two  miles. 

We  had  not  gone  over  four  miles  before  we  came  to 
another  plantation.  Here  the  negro  left  me  concealed  behind 
a  tree  while  he  went  to  reconnoitre  the  premises.  Presently 
he  came  back,  and  we  entered  a  poor-looking  cabin,  A 
number  of  young  negroes,  dressed  in  Confederate  uniforms, 
were  in  the  room;  and  I  was  somewhat  doubtful  of  their 
character.  They  noticed  this,  and  did  their  best  to  re-assure 
me. 

Presently  a  white  man  came  in,  also  dressed  in  uniform. 
I  sprang  up,  and  thought  I  was  surely  betrayed;  but  he 
advanced,  and  accosted  me  politely  and  pleasantly.  I  did 
not  know  what  to  make  of  him,  and  told  him  so ;  at  which 
they  all  laughed,  telling  me  that  he  was  a  slave  just  as  they 
were.  I  could  scarcely  believe  it.  He  was  a  large,  fine- 
looking  man,  with  straight,  light-colored  hair,  blue  eyes,  and 
a  florid  complexion.  Accustomed  as  I  had  become  to  all 
shades  of  negro  complexion,  I  was  puzzled  with  him.  There 
was  not  the  least  indication  of  negro  blood  about  him ;  in 
fact,  his  skin  was  much  lighter  than  mine. 

He  sat  down,  and  they  and  he  told  me  his  story.     He  was 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  175 

married  to  a  mulatto  girl  named  Lucy,  who  belonged  to  the 
plantation  where  we  were.  He  had  lived  on  the  place  ad- 
joining ;  but  one  day  his  master  became  frightened  about  the 
Yankees,  and  started  with  all  his  slaves  for  Georgia.  This 
one  escaped  just  beyond  the  Meheria  River,  and  made  his 
way  back  to  his  wife,  who  had  since  been  able  to  see  him  only 
in  stolen  interviews ;  he  being  obliged  to  stay  in  the  woods  in 
the  vicinity.  However,  as  the  planter  was  old,  and  not  able 
to  move  about  much,  he  was  able  to  visit  his  wife  quite 
often. 

About  daybreak,  this  man  and  I  went  out  to  a  little  piece 
of  woods  near  by,  and  had  quite  a  chat ;  he  giving  me  many 
valuable  hints  as  to  my  future  operations.  When  the  sun 
was  about  an  hour  high,  a  very  graceful  and  pretty  mulatto 
woman  came  to  us,  bringing  ft  warm  breakfast  of  fresh  pork 
and  yam-potatoes,  hot  corn-bread,  and  sweet  milk.  The 
potatoes  were  red  outside  and  yellow  within,  and  the  best  I 
ever  ate. 

Alvin,  the  white  slave,  had  been  thinking  of  going  North 
for  some  time ;  and  all  the  negroes  had  advised  him  to  go, 
and,  now  that  I  had  come,  urged  him  strongly  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  opportunity.  I  told  him  I  should  be  very 
glad  to  have  his  company,  and  urged  him  to  start ;  alleging  as 


176  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

a  reason  why  he  should,  that  the  season  would  soon  be  too 
inclement  to  allow  of  his  remaining  out  of  doors.  His  wife, 
however,  clung  to  him,  and  begged  him  not  to  leave  her, 
and,  although  she  acknowledged  the  force  of  our  arguments, 
would  not  consent  to  his  going. 

We  spent  the  forenoon  in  the  bushes.  He  had  a  fine  six- 
shooter,  of  Colt's  pattern,  and,  I  thought,  would  not  have 
hesitated  to  use  it,  had  occasion  required.  Several  Confede- 
rate soldiers  rode  by  our  place  of  concealment ;  but  they  did 
not  see  us.  About  half  a  dozen  also  were  at  the  house, 
having  a  merry  time  with  the  young  ladies.  I  slept  some 
during  the  morning ;  but  Alvin  appeared  to  be  studying  in- 
tently about  something.  I  suppose  he  was  trying  to  decide 
to  leave  his  wife,  who  was  too  delicate  to  go  with  him. 

About  noon,  Lucy  brought  \is  a  bountiful  dinner  of  fricas- 
seed chicken,  roast  pork,  sweet  and  common  potatoes,  cab- 
bage, and  a  nice  pudding.  She,  Alvin,  and  I  then  sat 
down  in  the  dryest  spot  we  could  find  (for  the  place  was 
swampy),  and  were  eating,  when  another  mulatto  lady  came 
out  to  us.  She  was  dressed  in  black,  with  a  very  capacious 
crinoline ;  and  looked  very  much  as  if  she  had  been  boxed  up 
on  Broadway,  and  freshly  opened  in  Virginia.  Her  features 
were  good,  and  she  had  a  very  high  forehead.     Other  negroes 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  177 

soon  joined  us ;  and,  having  eaten  onr  dinner,  we  invited 
them  to  finish  the  food,  which  they  did,  sitting  down  in  an 
easy  way,  and  showing  considerable  natural  refinement. 
One  of  the  men  brought  a  bottle  of  apple-brandy,  which  one 
of  the  women  discovered,  and,  after  a  regular  gale,  got  from 
him.  We  had  a  little  all  round ;  mine  being  so  strong,  it 
nearly  took  my  head  ofi*.  Altogether,  it  was  a  merry  pic- 
nic ;  and  I  enjoyed  it,  though  I  was  a  fugitive,  and  my 
companions  were  negroes. 

They  proposed  that  one  of  their  number  should  go  with 
me  that  night  as  far  as  Rowanty  Creek,  where  was  a  man 
who  would  give  me  another  "lift."  Alvin  could  not  get 
his  wife's  permission  t(f  accompany  me,  and  so  bade  me  good- 
by  when  I  started,  which  was  soon  after  dark.  An  old  man 
went  with  me,  I  carrying  his  bundle,  which  helped  him 
along  considerably.  When  we  neared  the  old  man's  cabin, 
he  pointed  it  out  to  me  at  the  farther  end  of  a  long  clearing; 
and,  entering  the  clearing,  we  approached  it  quietly.  We 
had  not  gone  far,  however,  before  a  gun  was  fired  only  two 
or  three  rods  from  us.  I  was  somewhat  startled  by  the 
report ;  but,  as  I  heard  the  noise  of  geese  flying  overhead, 
I  concluded  it  was  some  one  firing  at  random,  which  it 
probably  was. 

12 


178  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

The  negro  left  me  in  the  clearing  wbile  be  went  to  the 
house  and  reconnoitred.  He  presently  returned,  saying  all 
was  right  at  the  house  ;  and  we  went  there  together.  I  was 
about  going  on  among  the  "quarters;"  but  the  negro 
marched  straight  to  the  "great  house,"  and  entered.  I 
supposed  he  would  soon  come  out,  and  show  me  to  one  of 
the  cabins :  so  I  waited  outside  until  he  came  to  the  door 
again  and  asked  me  to  come  in.  I  inquired,  in  some  sur- 
prise, if  there  were  not  white  folks  at  the  mansion ;  and  he  said, 
"No."  It  appeared  that  Lucy's  master  (a  Major  Rony) 
owned  the  place,  which  had  formerly  been  occupied  by  his 
daughter  and  son-in-law;  but,  they  having  gone  to  Texas, 
the  house  had  been  turned  over  to  the  negroes  who  worked 
the  plantation.  We  entered  a  pleasant  room,  where  were 
several  good-looking  negroes;  and  the  old  man  left  for  a 
plantation  a  little  farther  on. 

The  negroes  placed  a  chair  for  me  near  the  fire  ;  and, 
seating  ourselves  in  a  cosey  half-circle,  we  chatted  away  for 
a  while  very  pleasantly.  My  companions  were  two  pretty 
girls  and  an  old  woman,  —  old,  but  small  and  smart  enough 
to  be  a  girl  of  sixteen.  She  had  been  at  the  North,  and  was 
very  well  informed  on  ordinary  subjects.  She  told  me  of 
the  killing  of  Randall,  and  of  several  other  things  substan- 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  179 

tially  as  I  had  heard  them ;  and  spoke  also  of  four  of 
Wilson's  raiders  who  had  been  left  wounded  at  Dinwiddle 
Court  House.  Some  of  the  women  there  were  anxious  to 
poison  them,  but,  being  in  a  minority,  were  prevented. 
However,  when  the  men  were  nearly  recovered,  they  died 
very  suddenly  and  mysteriously,  and  were  buried  near  the 
bridge  over  which  I  had  passed. 

These  women  told  me  all  about  the  strength  and  disposi- 
tion of  the  Eebel  forces.  They  were  particularly  desurous 
I  should  tell  our  generals  about  a  place  called  Stony-Creek 
Depot,  where  a  large  quantity  of  supplies,  wagons,  and  cars, 
were  stored,  which  it  would  be  well  to  destroy. 

We  were  sitting  there,  coseyly  enjoying  ourselves,  when 
some  one  smashed  open  the  door,  and  ran  away,  yelling  terri- 
fically. I  sprang  up,  wondering  what  was  the  matter,  and 
very  soon  discovered  a  number  of  negroes  running  about, 
screaming  "  Fire  !"  The  flames  were  bursting  through  the 
roof,  and  had  already  attained  good  headway  at  the  farther 
end  of  the  house.  Taking  my  things,  I  put  them  into  one 
of  the  cabins,  and  then,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  negroes, 
kept  out  of  sight,  lest  some  one,  seeing  the  fire  from  the 
road,  should  come  over  and  detect  me.  I  thought  the 
negroes  could  put  out  the  fire,  but  soon  saw  it  gaining  on 


180  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

them  rapidly.  They  were  fast  growing  discouraged ;  and,  as 
they  had  been  very  kind  to  me,  I  thought  I  could  do  no  less 
than  help  them.  Emerging  from  my  hiding-place,  I  went  to 
work  with  a  will,  first  getting  together  every  thing  that 
would  hold  water,  and  then  setting  every  man,  woman,  and 
child  to  bringing  it  from  a  large  spring  not  far  off.  I  en- 
couraged them  by  every  means  in  my  power ;  and  soon  they 
were  doing  their  best. 

I  went  up  stairs,  where  a  man  was  trying  to  do  something ; 
but  he  had  become  sick,  and  was  fast  giving  out.  Standing 
up  in  a  chair,  I  cut  a  hole  through  the  shingles  with  an  axe ; 
and  then,  the  old  woman  handing  me  water,  I  deluged  the 
whole  outside  of  the  roof.  The  heat  was  almost  unbearable 
at  first;  but  I  soon  got  the  fire  under  a  little,  and  then, 
forcing  myself  through  the  hole  in  the  roof,  throwing  water 
judiciously,  and  tearing  off  the  burning  boards  and  shingles, 
speedily  got  the  flames  under.  It  was  an  hour  or  more,  how- 
ever, before  the  fire  was  altogether  extinguished.  It  would 
burst  forth  every  now  and  then  in  some  new  place ;  but  final- 
ly the  last  spark  went  out,  and  I  began  to  think  it  was  time 
to  conceal  myself.  I  wondered  that  no  one  had  yet  come  : 
but  the  house  was  a  long  way  from  anywhere ;  and,  being 
surrounded  by  high  trees,  the  fire  was  probably  not  seen 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  181 

from  a  distance,  or,  if  seen,  the  bright  blaze  did  not  last 
long,  and  any  one  who  had  started  would  be  apt  to  turn 
back.     As  it  was,  no  one  came. 

We  partially  replaced  the  disordered  furniture,  and  then 
sat  down  to  talk  the  matter  over.  The  negroes  were  veiy 
thankful  to  me,  and  I  was  glad  to  have  been  able  to  serve 
them.  I  had  lost  my  cap,  and  it  was  not  found  until  the 
next  morning.  I  dropped  it  while  fighting  the  fire  in.  the 
garret ;  and  the  old  woman  had  thrown  it  out  of  the  win- 
dow, and  forgotten  all  about  it. 

The  man  who  was  going  to  show  me  the  way  through  the 
swamps  was  sick,  and  the  others  were  afraid  he  would  not  be 
able  to  go  with  me.  They  thought  I  had  better  wait  until 
the  next  night,  however,  and  he  might  be  better  :  meanwhile 
I  could  hide  in  the  house.  I  did  not  lie  down  until  mid- 
night, but  then  slept  soundly  until  morning,  and  woke 
feeling  quite  refreshed.  I  had  burned  and  bruised  my 
hands  somewhat,  but,  aside  from  that,  was  in  good  con- 
dition. 

The  old  woman  made  me  a  nice  breakfast ;  and  after 
breakfast,  as  I  was  sitting  by  the  fire,  a  little  darky  ran  into 
the  room,  saying  that  a  squad  of  soldiers  were  coming  to  the 
house.     As  the  house  was  in  a  clearing,  I  could  not  leave 


182  ADIUFT  IN  DIXIE. 

it  without  being  seen ;  and  it  would  have  been  fool-hardy 
to  attempt  to  run  from  mounted  men.  They  did  not  know 
I  was  there,  unless  the  negroes  had  betrayed  me ;  and  I 
concluded  I  could  hide  from  them  easily.  Harriet,  the 
prettiest  of  the  girls,  escorted  me  up  stairs,  and  concealed 
me  in  a  little  nook  under  the  roof  of  an  ell-part  of  the 
building.  She  said  she  would  make  the  soldiers  talk  if  they 
came  about  the  house,  so  I  might  hear  what  they  said. 

The  soldiers  soon  came  all  about  the  building,  and  another 
squad  went  to  a  log-barn  near  by.  The  latter  began  to  rob 
the  barn  of  its  fodder,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  the 
negroes ;  and  the  soldiers  lounging  about  the  house,  to  try  to 
beg  or  buy  some  molasses.  One  of  them  had  some  coffee, 
which  he  called  "  pure  Java ;  "  and  he  wanted  to  exchange 
a  bagful  of  it  for  a  pint  of  molasses :  but  the  negroes  were 
not  anxious  to  trade.  They  seemed  only  intent  on  keeping 
the  soldiers  out  of  the  house. 

The  girl  Harriet  amused  me  very  much  by  her  conversa- 
tion with  the  soldiers.  As  they  remained  at  the  house  all 
day,  it  would  take  too  much  space  to  detail  all  they  said. 
Their  remarks  about  the  war  were  highly  edifying.  They 
appeared  to  be  discouraged,  and  not  very  hostile  to  the 
Yankees.     Some  quite  good-looking  men  were  among  them, 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  183 

and  many  who  were  tolerably  well  dressed.  Their  horses 
were  rather  poor  in  flesh,  but  looked  smart  and  active. 

The  negroes,  seeing  that  the  fodder  was  fast  disappearing, 
determined  to  save  all  they  could  by  bringing  it  into  the 
house.  A  soldier  had  come  along  who  was  a  friend  of  Major 
Rony's ;  and  he  told  the  negroes,  if  they  would  give  him  two 
or  three  bundles  of  fodder,  he  would  pretend  to  be  a  guard 
sent  from  camp,  and  would  not  allow  any  more  to  be  taken 
by  the  others.  He  did  so  ;  and  the  other  soldiers,  thinking 
he  was  a  guard,  did  not  dare  to  take  any  more.  It  was, 
however,  already  half  gone. 

The  soldiers  spoke  to  the  negroes  about  the  fire,  and  asked 
how  it  occurred.  The  negroes  answered  that  a  man  was 
going  by  the  house,  when  a  flock  of  geese  flew  over.  He 
fired  at  them ;  and  the  wadding  from  his  gun,  lodging  on 
the  roof,  had  set  it  on  fire.  This  was  a  falsehood,  intended 
partially  to  shield  them  from  the  wrath  of  Major  Rony. 
The  real  state  of  the  case  was  this  :  A  fire  had  been  kindled 
on  the  hearth  of  one  of  the  upper  chambers ;  and  a  spark, 
snapping  from  it,  had  lodged  in  among  some  fire-wood  piled 
against  a  wooden  wainscot.  The  wood  had  set  the  wainscot 
on  fire,  and  the  flames  had  climbed  up  to  the  roof.    This  was 


184  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

as  plain  as  a  pikestaff.    The  negroes  chopped  away  the  wain- 
scoting that  the  major  might  not  detect  it. 

"While  the  negroes  were  bringing  in  the  fodder,  two  others 
came  down  to  the  plantation  from  Major  Rony's.  I  had 
met  them  there ;  in  fact,  they  were  at  the  picnic.  One  of 
them  came  to  me  in  the  gaiTct ;  and  we  lay  there  together, 
making  whispered  comments  on  the  Rebels  as  they  moved 
about  the  lawn.  The  negro  was  a  witty  fellow,  and  enjoyed 
watching  the  soldiers  as  they  walked  or  rode  unconsciously 
about  below  us,  so  near  that  their  heads  were  often  not  more 
than  five  or  six  feet  away. 

The  Rebels  took  a  number  of  things  which  were  lying 
about,  mostly  horse-gear ;  but  behaved  tolerably  well,  being 
evidently  afraid  of  Major  Rony.  The  two  men  who  had 
come  down  were  going  to  another  plantation,  which  was  in 
the  direction  I  wished  to  go ;  and  as  Greorge,  the  man  who 
was  to  have  gone  with  me,  was  still  too  sick  to  travel,  they 
consented  to  wait  until  dark,  and  accompany  me.  Harriet 
was  to  come  down  the  next  day  to  look   after  some  swine 

which  were  there ;  and  she  would  show  me  the  way  through 
the  swamp. 

^ At  noon,  Harriet  brought  me  a  good  dinner ;  and  I  quite 
enjoyed  myself,  feeling  no  concern  on  account  of  the  Rebels, 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  185 

though  there  were  probably  two  hundred  about  the  house 
thi'oughout  the  day.  They  were  a  rough  set  generally,  and 
looked  as  if  they  might  bear  a  great  deal  of  hardship.  The 
negro  said  they  belonged  to  Hampton's  division  of  cavalry, 
and  to  Mederrin's,  Berringer's,  and  Buller's  brigades,  which 
were  encamped  aljout  a  mile  distant.  The  negro  told  me  of 
an  affau'  which  happened  to  Buller's  brigade  just  after  the 
fight  at  Ream's  Station,  which  is  worth  repeating.  It  seemed 
that  nearly  all  of  the  brigade  had  clothed  themselves  in  blue 
overcoats  by  stripping  our  dead,  wounded,  and  prisoners. 
As  they  were  returning  to  camp,  the  remainder  of  the  divis- 
ion fell  upon  them,  and,  before  the  mistake  was  discovered, 
killed  and  wounded  quite  a  number. 

When  it  came  night,  the  Rebels  nearly  all  returned  to 
their  camp.  The  negroes  who  were  to  accompany  me  were 
impatient  to  start :  but  one  of  the  soldiers  remained  at  the 
door,  making  some  bargain  about  his  washing ;  and  I  had  to 
wait  until  he  was  gone  before  coming  down  from  the  garret. 
He  went  at  last ;  and  I  was  going  out,  having  taken  leave  of 
the  negroes,  when  another  Rebel  rode  up  on  some  trivial 
errand.  The  negroes  were  waiting  for  me  at  the  eastern  end 
of  the  clearing;  and,  seeing  no  immediate  prospect  of  the 
soldier  leaving,  I  leaped  out  of  a  window  on  the  opposite 


186  ADrxlFT  IN  DIXIE. 

side  of  the  house,  and,  scouting  quietly  through  the  corn- 
field, soon  came  upon  tlie  negroes. 

We  tramped  along  for  two  hours,  the  n-egroes  using  great 
caution,  and  watching  narrowly  for  any  Rebels  who  might 
chance  to  be  roving  about.  One  of  them  was  going  to  work 
at  Stony-Creek  Depot,  the  other  on  a  plantation  near  by. 
They  intended  accompanying  me  as  far  as  the  place  where 
the  swine  were  kept,  when  we  all  would  take  up  our  quar- 
ters in  a  deserted  cabin  near  by  until  morning.  They 
thought  I  had  better  wait  there  until  Harriet  came  down, 
when  she  would  show  me  the  swamp-path.  At  last  we 
arrived  at  the  cabin.  They  somewhat  expected  to  find  a 
runaway  there,  who  was  trying  to  get  to  our  lines ;  but  he 
was  gone,  and  had  probably  already  started. 

To  show  how  independent  the  negroes  on  this  place  were, 
I  will  tell  a  little  circumstance  about  Harriet.  She  was 
supposed  to  occupy  the  cabin,  and  to  stay  there,  caring  for 
the  swine.  But,  running  loose,  the  swine  would  not  suffer 
from  inattention  ;  and,  disliking  to  live  in  the  lonesome  place, 
Harriet,  without  her  master's  knowledge,  made  her  home  at 
the  mansion.  The  woman  at  the  Clarksville  Feny  had 
given  me  a  few  matches ;  and  with  them  we  made  a  fire,  and 
I  passed  the  rest  of  the  night  in  sound  slumber. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  187 

The  negroes  awoke  before  daybreak  ;  and,  being  anxious  to 
start  on,  I  asked  them  if  they  could  not  direct  me,  so  I  might 
find  the  way  through  the  swamp  by  myself.  They  thought, 
as  I  had  come  that  far  without  getting  into  trouble,  I 
should  have  none  in  getting  through,  but  said  I  would  have 
to  keep  my  wits  about  me,  as  there  was  no  path  in  the 
swamp.  I  should  have  to  stop  directly  west  of  the  place  I 
wanted  to  come  out  at,— between  two  pickets,  — and  then  go 
straight  towards  the  rising  sun.  I  must  look  out  for  snakes 
also  :  for,  though  it  was  late  in  the  season,  I  might,  in  step- 
ping on  some  rotten  log,  disturb  one ;  and  his  bite  would  be 
sure  death. 

After  passing  the  swamp,  I  should  come  first  upon  a  dirt 
road,  and  then  —  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  farther  —  upon 
the  Weldon  Railroad.  Beyond  that  they  knew  nothing,  but 
thought  that,  once  across  the  railroad,  I  should  be  safe,  as  no 
negro  who  had  gone  that  way  ever  came  back ;  and  they 
thought  all  had  got  through  safely. 

I  did  not  like  the  idea  of  remaining  about  the  cabin  all 
day  merely  to  see  Harriet,  who,  at  the  best,  could  guide  me 
but  a  short  distance  into  the  swamp.  Besides,  the  shanty 
was  on  a  road  leading  from  one  Rebel  camp  to  another,  and 
there  would  likely  be  soldiers  passing  upon  it.     So  I  con- 


188  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

eluded  to  avoid  the  danger,  get  the  best  start  possible,  and 
make  my  own  way  through  the  swamp  as  well  as  I  could. 
The  negroes  dii-ected  me  to  a  point  on  the  edge  of  the  swamp. 
I  could  not  see  the  place  in  the  dim  light  of  the  early  dawn  : 
but  their  directions  were  so  minute,  that  I  could  not  very 
well  miss  it ;  and,  bidding  them  good-by,  I  started  for  the 
trackless  wilderness. 

For  about  half  a  mile  of  the  way,  there  was  an  old  path ; 
and  at  the  end  of  it  I  came  upon  the  ruins  of  a  plantation- 
house.  From  there  I  went  on  in  a  north-east  direction, 
keeping  upon  the  high  and  cleared  land  as  long  as  I  could, 
according  to  the  directions.  The  swamp,  for  thirty  or  forty 
rods,  was  not  very  wet ;  but,  beyond  that  distance,  a  shal- 
low, stagnant  lake  lay  spread  out  before  me  as  far  as  I 
could  see.  A  heavy  growth  of  trees,  shooting  high  up  and 
casting  gloomy  shadows  around,  great  prostrate  rotten  logs, 
and  flaunting  moss  floating  about  in  the  misty  air,  made  a 
rather  dismal  picture.  The  coming  sun  was  flushing  the 
eastern  horizon.  I  could  catch  glimpses  of  it  through  the 
thickly  springing  trees,  and,  facing  a  little  to  the  north, 
plunged  into  the  swamp. 

One  of  my  shoes  was  so  badly  worn,  that  I  had  to  tie  a 
string  about  it  to  keep  the  upper-leather  and  sole  together. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  189 

This  came  off  in  the  mud,  and  I  had  to  use  great  care  not 
to  lose  my  shoe.  The  water  the  most  of  the  way  was  up 
to  my  knees,  and  the  mud  was  bottomless.  However,  by 
stepping  on  submerged  branches,  I  avoided  sinking ;  though 
now  and  then  I  liad  to  spring  and  leap  about  very  lively 
to  keep  from  sticking  fast. 

I  rested  occasionally  on  logs,  using  them  also  for  foot 
bridges  when  I  could  do  so,  but  soon  began  to  think  the 
morass  had  no  end ;  for  still  the  endless  column  of  trees,  the 
glassy  reaches  of  slimy  water,  and  the  broken  network  of 
rotten  logs,  lay  spread  out  before  me.  But  there  is  an  end 
to  every  thing,  —  even  to  Virginia  swamps :  so  I  kept  on 
as  best  I  could,  with  my  face  towards  the  rising  sun. 

When  I  first  entered  the  swamp,  I  had  heard  several  dis- 
charges of  a  musket  a  little  to  the  left  and  quite  near  to 
me,  I  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it,  and  concluded,  if 
some  one  was  out  gunning,  they  were  at  it  bright  and  early. 
I  put  as  much  swamp  between  me  and  the  reports  as  I  could 
in  a  limited  space  of  time ;  but,  after  four  or  five  discharges, 
the  sounds  died  away,  and  I  heard  no  more  of  them.  I  did 
not  then  know  what  to  make  of  them,  and  do  not  now. 

After  floundering  about  for  at  least  two  miles,  I  came  to 
running  water  of  considerable  depth.     This  I  concluded  was 


190  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

wliat  the  negroes  liad  called  Rowaiity  Creek.  Fording  it, 
I  kept  on  about  two  miles  farther ;  when  I  emerged  from 
the  swamp,  and  came  at  last  upon  higher  ground.  I  was 
dead  tired,  and  my  legs  were  badly  bruised  with  stumbling 
over  broken  sticks  and  knotty  logs ;  but  I  went  on  a  little 
farther  before  I  sat  down  to  rest,  and  clean  the  mud  and 
wring  the  water  from  my  clothes.  I  was  soon  somewhat 
rested,  and  then  started  again.  I  had  now  come  upon 
cleared  ground,  and  had  to  use  great  care  not  to  be  seen, 
and  so  took  advantage  of  all  the  little  hollows  and  woods. 
No  buildings,  except  a  fine-looking  plantation-house  about  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  away,  were  in  sight;  and  the  morning 
was  somewhat  foggy.     All  this  was  in  my  favor. 

At  the  end  of  a  long  half-mile,  I  came  upon  the  high- 
road. I  was  delighted  to  see  it, — it  seemed  like  an  old 
friend;  and  I  could  hardly  restrain  a  joyful  exclamation. 
In  fact,  all  of  the  places  to  which  I  had  been  directed  were 
so  constantly  in  my  mind,  that,  when  I  came  to  them,  they 
seemed  old  friends.  Even  the  Dismal  Swamp  carried  me 
through  a  chain  of  Rebel  pickets. 

Looking  sharply  up  and  down  the  road,  and  seeing  no 
one,  I  skipped  across  it  to  the  woods  on  the  other  side,  and 
then  pressed  forward.     Less  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  be- 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  191 

yond  I  came  upon  the  Weldon  Railroad,  and  my  spirits  rose 
to  even  a  higher  pitch;  and  a  feeling  of  safety  and  con- 
fidence came  upon  me,  which  I  had  not  felt  before.  The 
track  at  this  point  was  cut  through  a  heavy  pine-forest,  and 
excavated  to  the  depth  of  eight  or  ten  feet;  the  earth 
being  thrown  up  in  two  long  yellow  heaps  on  either  side. 
Standing  in  the  edge  of  the  wood  near  the  road,  I  looked 
carefully  up  and  down  the  long  vista  of  pine-trees  which 
crowded  closely  down  to  the  track  to  see  if  any  one  was 
there  who  would  be  likely  to  give  me  trouble.  Away 
towards  Ream's  Station,  where  the  two  lines  of  rails  came 
almost  to  a  point,  I  thought  I  saw  something  moving  like 
men.  They  were,  however,  too  far  away  to  cause  me  any 
difficulty ;  and,  going  a  little  farther  down  the  road,  I 
crawled  across,  and  got  into  the  woods  on  the  opposite  side. 
I  knew  that  our  forces  held  Ream's  Station,  which  was  about 
eight  miles  to  the  north,  and  thought  it  likely  that  the  Rebels 
had  a  body  of  troops  this  side  of  them.  Their  lines,  how- 
ever, did  not  probably  extend  far  beyond  the  railroad ;  and 
I  decided  to  go  six  or  eight  miles  in  an  easterly  direction, 
and  then  to  strike  north  towards  our  army,  which  lay  between 
City  Point  and  Petersburg. 

The  sun  was  a  little  more  than  an  hour  high,  and  the 


192  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

morning  a  beautifal  one.  A  plantation  was  on  my  left ;  and 
I  crossed  the  road,  and  went  among  the  pines :  but  no  one 
saw  me,  thougli  they  were  grinding  sorghum,  as  I  knew  by 
the  shrieking  and  groaning  of  the  mill.  I  made  my  way  as 
directly  as  I  could  towards  the  east,  though  I  had  to  make 
long  detours  to  avoid  crossing  open  fields.  At  last  I  came 
to  a  narrow  road  leading  east,  and  followed  it,  occasionally 
turning  off  where  it  crossed  long  openings.  I  passed  one 
complete  line  of  intrenchments  stretching  as  far  as  the  eye 
could  reach,  and  several  smaller  breastworks  commanding 
the  road.  These  were  built  opposite  swampy  places,  where 
cavalry  would  be  compelled  to  keep  the  road,  and  where 
even  infantry  would  have  difficulty  in  getting  thi'ough  the 
swamp,  owino;  to  the  thickness  of  the  trees  and  u-nderbrush. 
All  these  roads  were  deserted.  I  crossed  several  little 
rivulets  during  the  morning,  the  water  of  which  was  very 
refreshing;  and  I  think  the  best  water  I  ever  drank  was 
in  Virginia. 

I  had  left  the  raikoad,  and  gone  about  two  miles,  when  I 
saw  a  house  ahead.  A  thick  grove  was  between  me  and  it, 
and  I  did  not  see  it  until  closely  upon  it.  The  country  was 
open  for  a  long  distance  ahead ;  and  I  saw  that  I  should  have 
to  make  a  detour  of  several  miles  to  avoid  the  plantations 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  193 

which  were  scattered  along  the  side  of  the  road.  I  deter- 
mined not  to  do  this  unless  absolutely  obliged  to,  and  so 
went  up  near  the  house  to  reconnoitre.  Presently  a  woman 
came  out  on  the  veranda.  I  did  not  fancy  her  looks,  and 
crawled  back  out  of  sight.  I  did  not  like  to  turn  back,  and 
thought  it  just  as  dangerous  in  one  place  as  another. 

In  front  of  the  house,  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road, 
was  a  large  cornfield.  A  Virginia  fence  ran  along  the  side 
of  the  cornfield,  and  up  over  a  hill,  on  the  top  of  which  were 
a  few  scattered  trees  and  bushes,  and  one  round,  compact 
clump  of  cedars,  which  I  noticed  for  its  beauty,  not  thinking 
it  was  to  be  one  of  the  many  means  of  saving  me  from  Rebel 
clutches.  Beyond  the  hill  I  could  see  the  tops  of  other 
trees,  and  judged  I  could  keep  among  them  until  I  had 
passed  the  cleared  opening.  I  was  in  doubt  whether  I  had 
yet  passed  the  Rebel  pickets,  and  decided  to  be  a  little  care- 
ful. I  thought  I  might  possibly  meet  some  of  our  fora- 
ging parties  or  cavalry  scouting  about,  but  knew  I  was 
just  as  likely  to  meet  Rebels  on  the  same  business,  and 
decided  to  keep  out  of  sight  until  nightfall ;  then  I  would 
try  to  find  a  negro  who  could  tell  me  where  I  was. 

The  fence  ran  over  the  hill  at  such  an  angle,  that,  by  keep- 
ing close  to  it,  I  could  not  be  seen  fi'om  the  house.  I  went 
13 


194  ADniFT  IN  DIXIE. 

back  tbe  road  a  little  distance,  then  over  tbe  fence,  and  then, 
crouching  low  down  among  the  standing  corn,  crawled  up 
the  slope.  I  travelled  in  this  manner  until  nearly  to  the 
top  of  the  hill ;  when,  seeing  a  persimmon-tree  a  rod  or  two 
out  in  the  corafield,  I  went  to  it  to  gather  some  persimmons. 
The  stalks  of  corn  were  thin  and  small,  but,  at  that  distance 
from  the  house,  were  a  tolerable  screen.  I  gathered  some 
of  the  fruit,  and,  sitting  down  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  on  the 
side  opposite  the  house,  unrolled  my  blanket,  took  out  my 
bread,  and  proceeded  to  breakfast.  The  clump  of  trees  I 
have  spoken  of  was  two  or  three  rods  ahead,  and  about  a 
rod  of  open  space  was  between  it  and  the  fence.  A  little 
farther  up,  on  the  other  side  of  the  fence,  and  on  the  crest 
of  the  hill,  were  more  bushes. 

As  I  sat  there  eating  my  breakfast,  I  hc;rd  the  faint  beat- 
ing of  drums,  and  thought  I  could  distinguish  the  strains  of  a 
band  far  off  in  the  distance.  The  sounds  resembled  national 
au'S ;  and  I  felt  happy  enough,  thinking  that  I  soon  would  be 
under  the  starry  banner.  The  sounds  probably  came  from 
the  garrison  at  Ream's  Station,  which  I  had  neared  consid- 
erably. 

I  was  sitting  there,  unsuspicious  of  danger,  and  thinking 
on  the  glorious  prospect  of  being  once  again  within   the 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  105 

* 

Union  lines,  and  once  more  among  comrades  and  friends, 
when  I  beard  a  thumping  sound  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  and 
directly  after  saw  emerge  from  the  bushes  a  mounted  soldier. 
I  lost  my  appetite  directly,  but,  except  drawing  my  head 
partially  behind  the  tree,  remained  perfectly  immovable. 

The   man  was  a  stout,  muscular  fellow,   mounted  on  a 
large  black  horse,   and,  when  he  first  came  in  sight,  was 
looking  towards  the  east,  but,  when  nearly  opposite  to  me, 
turned  his  eyes  towards  the  west,  and,  as  I  thought,  directly 
at  me.     I  was  about  to  got  up,  supposing  my  tramping  was 
over ;  and  I  felt  terribly,  to  be  recaptured  in  that  silly  way 
after  all  I  had  suffered :  but  something  in  the  man's  face 
held  me  still.     He  seemed  to  look  over  me ;  and  his  eye  gave 
out  no  sign  of  recognition,  though  I  was  not  more  than  two 
rods  distant.       I  noticed  his  every  movement,  —his  dangling 
sabre,  his  carbine,  his  pistols,  and  the  three  canteens  which 
were  slung  over  his  shoulders.     I  also  noticed  that  he  was 
well  dressed,  and  wore  a  black  plume  in  his  hat.     All  this  I 
saw  in  a  second  of  time,  and  the  man  had  passed  me  !     I 
could  scarcely  believe  my  senses.     I  concluded,  that,  pre- 
tending not  to  see  me,  he  was  only  going  farther  down  the 
fence  to  cut  me  off  from  the  road;  and  I  watched  him  with 
every  nerve  strained  as  he  trotted  his  horse  easily  down  the 


196  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

hill.  He  sat  slouchingly  in  the  saddle,  with  apparently 
nothing  on  his  mind,  and  soon  reached  the  road.  I  did  not 
watch  him  farther,  but,  snatching  up  my  things,  started  up 
the  hill,  full  of  delighted  wonder  at  my  escape. 

I  was  hurrying  along  the  fence,  and  had  just  passed  the 
clump  of  bushes,  when,  just  ahead  of  me,  I  saw  what  startled 
me  more  than  the  horseman.  Just  over  the  fence,  amons^ 
some  low  bushes,  were  half  a  dozen  horses  tied,  and  seated  on 
the  ground,  beside  a  low  fire,  half  a  dozen  Kebel  soldiers.  I 
could  see  only  their  heads,  and  a  thin  spiral  of  smoke  curling 
up  from  among  them.  Their  horses  were  saddled;  and  their 
blankets,  sabres,  and  pistols  were  slung  upon  the  animals. 

I  did  not  stop  long  to  look,  but,  with  my  hopes  decided- 
ly below  par,  slunk  back  among  the  bushes.  Among  them 
were  several  rotten  logs,  one  immense  overturned  stump, 
and  a  perfect  snarl  of  briers  and  underbrush ;  the  whole  not 
covering  a  quai'ter  of  an  acre.  I  crawled  into  the  deepest 
part  of  the  thicket,  making  as  little  noise  as  a  cat,  and  lay 
down  to  think  over  the  situation. 

I  could  account  for  my  escape  only  in  this  way  :  The  sun 
was  shining  in  the  man's  eyes ;  it  being  yet  early  mornmg, 
and  he  riding  towards  the  east.  He  probably  was  not  pai'ti- 
cularly  on  the  alert ;  and  my  clothing  being  of  the  color  of 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  197 

the  ground,  and  my  blue  cap  partially  hidden  by  the  trees, 
his  eyes  did  not  rest  on  me :  besides,  his  attention  was  attract- 
ed to  the  road. 

Soon,  as  I  lay  there  in  the  bushes,  I  heard  some  one  get- 
ting over  the  fence,  and  thought  at  first  the  soldiers  had 
heard  me,  and  were  coming  to  find  me.  It  was,  however, 
only  one  of  the  men  gathering  corn  for  the  horses ;  and  I  was 
still  safe.  I  could  hear  their  conversation  quite  distinctly, 
though  they  did  not  talk  much,  —  only  an  occasional  word  to 
their  horses,  or  a  casual  remark  among  themselves.  I  had 
to  lie  perfectly  still,  as  quantities  of  dry  sticks  lay  all  about, 
and  the  snapping  of  one  would  be  likely  to  rouse  their  sus- 
picion. 

The  horseman  who  came  so  near  without  seeing  me  soon 
returned  the  way  he  had  gone.  I  concluded  he  had  been 
down  to  the  house  for  whiskey,  milk,  or  molasses ;  and  I  no- 
ticed that  he  and  two  others  went  down  several  times  during 
the  day.  The  swamp-water  was  heavy  in  my  clothes,  and  I 
was  very  uncomfortable  lying  so  perfectly  immovable  on  the 
damp  ground ;  but  I  thanked  God  heartily  for  my  escape, 
which  seemed  to  me  little  short  of  miraculous.  The  men 
came  over  into  the  field  several  times  during  the  afternoon 


198  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

to  get  corn  for  their  horses ;  and  the  day  dragged  slowly  on, 
but  at  last  the  night  came. 

A^^ien  it  was  sufficiently  dark,  I  crawled  out  of  my  place 
of  concealment,  using  the  utmost  precaution.  I  went  on  my 
hands  and  knees  for  some  distance  towards  the  road ;  my 
legs  being  so  stiff  and  awkward,  I  could  not  walk  quietly. 
Soon  I  came  in  sight  of  a  house  not  far  away,  down  in  a 
hollow.  A  bright  (ire  was  burning  near  it ;  and,  approach- 
ing it  carefully,  I  saw  it  was  under  some  molasses-kettles, 
and  that  two  or  three  white  folks  were  standing  near  it. 

Regaining  the  road,  which  passed  just  in  front  of  the  house 
I  had  reconnoitred,  I  was  hastening  quietly  along  the  road, 
when  some  one  made  a  noise  like  a  suppressed  cough,  as  if 
to  attract  my  attention.  It  came  from  the  bushes  by  the  side 
of  the  road,  and  the  cough  sounded  like  a  woman's ;  but  I 
gave  it  no  attention.  Not  far  on,  I  came  to  a  fork  in  the  road, 
and  was  debating  which  way  to  go,  when  I  heard  voices 
following.  Stepping  behind  some  small  pine-trees,  I  waited 
for  them  to  approach.  I  listened  attentively  to  distinguish 
whether  they  were  negroes  or  white  people,  but  was  puzzled 
to  decide.  As  they  passed  by,  I  peered  though  the  bushes 
with  all  my  eyes,  and,  concluding  they  were  negroes,  stepped 
out  and  spoke  to  them.     They  were  much  astonished,  and 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  199 

not  a  little  frightened ;  but  after  I  had  announced  who  I  was, 
and  asked  their  advice  and  assistance,  they  promised  to  help 
me. 

They  told  me  that  one  of  the  roads  was  the  Jerusalem 
Plank-road,  the  other  a  private  way  leading  to  a  neighboring 
plantation;  and  that  it  was  lucky  I  had  not  gone  on  the 
former,  as  cavalry  were  passing  continually  on  it.  I  related 
my  adventure  of  the  morning ;  and  they  said  the  horsemen  I 
had  come  upon  were  the  pickets  of  a  concealed  cavalry 
camp,  and,  if  they  had  taken  me,  I  should  have  stood  a  poor 
chance  for  my  life.  They  belonged  to  Berringer's  brigade, 
—  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  rangers  who  encamped  in  out- 
of-the-way  places  to  avoid  surprise  by  oui'  cavalry. 

One  of  the  negroes  went  forward  some  distance  as  an 
advance-guard.  He  was  to  cough  in  case  of  any  trouble ; 
but  we  neared  the  plantation  without  being  alarmed.  A 
bright  fire  was  burning  in  front  of  one  of  the  cabins,  and  a 
negro  was  at  work  near  it.  Our  "advance-guard"  spoke 
to  him,  and  soon  after  the  fire  was  put  out.  The  negroes  did 
not  dare  to  let  me  into  any  of  then'  cabins,  it  being  so  early 
that  white  folks  might  visit  them :  so  I  staid  out  in  the  orchard 
until  about  ten  o'clock  at  night.  It  was  very  cold,  and  I 
found  it  difficult  to  keep  quiet  and  warm  at  the  same  time. 


200  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

At  last  they  let  me  into  one  of  the  shanties,  and  I  got  a  lit- 
tle rest,  which  I  very  much  needed.  My  entertainers  prom- 
ised to  pilot  me  through  a  swamp  which  would  carry  me  past 
the  cavalry  pickets,  and  said,  that,  when  I  had  gone  be- 
yond the  Jerusalem  Plank-road,  I  should  meet  no  more 
Eebels.  This  was  cheering  news,  and  on  the  strength  of  it  I 
slept  soundly.  Shortly  before  daybreak,  one  of  the  negroes 
awakened  me,  and  I  started  out  with  him  on  my  journey. 
As  we  walked  on,  he  related  several  incidents  of  operations 
in  that  quarter.  The  only  achievement  of  the  Rebels  for  a 
long  time  was  the  capture  of  a  herd  of.cows.^  The  negro  said 
they  made  a  great  ado  over  it,  and  bragged  as  if  they  had 
whipped  the  whole  North.  He  accompanied  me  to  the  edge 
of  the  swamp,  and  then,  giving  me  full  and  clear  du-ections 
how  to  proceed,  left  me. 

I  passed  the  swamp  without  much  difficulty,  it  not  being 
so  bad  as  the  other,  and,  having  gone  through  it,  came 
upon  a  broad,  lonely  expanse  of  country,  which  remind- 
ed me  of  descriptions  I  had  read  of  English  moors.  Af- 
ter going  about  two  miles  through  the  tall,  coarse  grass  and 
weeds,  I  came  upon  the  Jerusalem  Plank-road,  and,  cross- 
ing it  with  my  usual  caution,  pushed  on  into  the  woods 
on  the  opposite  side.     The  sun  had  just  risen  on  another 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  201 

beautiful  day,  and  I  enjoyed  my  tramp  through  the  odorous 
pine-forest  in  the  fresh  morning  air.  My  plan  was  to  strike 
two  or  three  miles  into  the  wood,  and  then  to  take  a  north- 
erly course  to  the  road  leading  to  City  Point,  on  which,  the 
negro  said,  our  pickets  were  stationed.  When  I  thought  I 
had  left  the  road  far  enough  behind,  I  turned  towards  the 
north,  and,  the  wood  being  but  little  obstructed  by  under- 
brush, made  rapid  progress ;  keeping  my  eye  and  ears  on  the 
alert,  and  treading  as  lightly  as  possible. 

After  a  while  I  came  to  the  vicinity  of  a  plantation,  as 
I  knew  by  the  cries  <^  -srarious  domestic  fowls.  I  tried  to 
get  a  look  at  things ;  but  it  was  not  imperatively  necessary, 
and  I  soon  gave  it  up.  Changing  my  course  a  little  more  to 
the  eastward,  I  shortly  came  upon  another  plantation,  which, 
after  a  reconnoissance,  I  discovered  was  deserted.  It  was 
quite  an  extensive  place,  and  looked  like  a  little  village.  I 
rummaged  about  the  building,  which  had  been  vacated  only  a 
short  time,  and  found  many  articles  useful  to  a  farmer  or 
housekeeper.  I  took  a  sickle,  thinking  it  might  perhaps 
be  of  use  against  dogs,  and  gathered  and  ate  some  ripe 
tomatoes. 

About  a  mile  farther  on,  I  came  to  another  clearing,  —  a 
large  one,  with  a  house  and  outbuildings,  which  looked  very 


202  ADETFT  IN  DIXIE. 

imposing.  I  thouglit  it  very  likely  it  was  on  the  road  I  was 
trying  to  find,  and,  desiring  to  get  information,  set  out  for 
some  cabins  on  the  farther  side  of  the  plantation.  Keeping 
in  the  edge  of  the  timber,  I  came  upon  the  road  as  I  had 
expected,  and,  crossing,  kept  on  towards  the  plantation. 

The  underbrush  was  so  thick,  I  could  scarcely  get  through 
it ;  and  I  made  very  slow  progress,  but  at  last  arrived  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  cabins.  They  were  at  a  little  distance  from 
the  edge  of  the  woods ;  but  a  tongue  of  trees  and  bushes 
extended  very  near  to  them.  I  kept  on  this  tongue,  which 
was  wet,  springy,  and  thickly  overgrop^n  with  cane,  until  I 
came  near  the  buildings.  About  a  dozen  negro  children 
"Wfere  playing  about ;  and,  as  I  could  see  no  one  else,  I  con- 
cluded to  accost  thera.  I  floundered  through  the  mud,  and 
came  as  quietly  as  I  could  to  the  side  the  children  were  on, 
and,  showing  myself  to  them,  beckoned  to  the  largest  to  come 
to  me.  I  looked  as  harmless  and  indifferent  as  I  could ; 
but,  instead  of  coming  towards  me,  they  made  a  grand  rush 
in  the  opposite  du'ection,  some  of  them  screaming  most 
lustily.  Their  screams  brought  a  negro  woman  to  the  win- 
dow of  one  of  the  cabins.  I  beckoned  to  her  with  all  the 
eloquence  I  could  throw  into  gestures;  and,  hushing  the 
children,  she  came  out  to  where  I  was.     She  was  young  and 


OVEItLAND    TRAVEL.  203 

good-looking.  I  liked  her  face  very  much,  and  trusted  her 
at  once,  telling  her  I  wanted  to  find  some  one  who  would 
direct  me  to  our  pickets.  She  said  she  would  send  a  man 
down  as  soon  as  he  came  in  for  dinner,  which  would  be 
soon ;  and  she  stood  talking  with  me  a  few  moments  before 
she  started  to  go  back  to  the  cabin,  saying  as  she  did  so, 
*' You  is  a  right  nice-lookin'  man,  I  declar."  I  felt  highly 
flattered.  She  had  not  been  gone  many  minutes  before  she 
returned,  bringing  some  cold  roast  pork,  hot  sweet-potatoes, 
corn-bread,  and  a  pitcher  of  milk.  I  ate  heartily,  and  had 
some  left. 

As  I  lay  in  the  reeds  waiting  for  the  man,  an  old  white 
hound  came  down,  and  stood  for  a  time  looking  at  me  in 
an  undecided  way,  as  if  she  did  not  know  whether  to  make 
friends  or  not.  I  tossed  her  a  bit  of  bread,  and  she  be- 
came very  affectionate.  I  then  lay  down  again ;  and  she 
lay  down  by  me,  while  I  fell  into  a  short  sleep.  Pres- 
ently I  was  awakened  by  some  one  approaching.  It  was 
the  negro.  He  said  there  was  one  more  picket-post  to  pass, 
and  then  all  I  would  have  to  fear  would  be  some  scouting- 
parties.  He  offered  to  take  me,  when  it  came  night,  to  a 
man  who  would  guide  me  to  our  pickets.     This  made  me 


204  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

feel  as  if  I  was  already  within  our  lines ;  and,  in  thinking  of 
home  and  friends,  the  afternoon  passed  quickly  away. 

Only  one  thing  occurred  to  disturb  me.  I  was  lying  very 
still,  but,  changing  my  position,  heard  something  spring 
away  from  near  me  with  a  growl,  and,  looking  up,  saw  a 
large,  savage-looking  dog  glaring  at  me  with  what  seemed 
murderous  intentions.  I  tossed  him  a  bit  of  bread ;  but  he 
took  no  notice  of  it,  and  went  tearing  off.  I  thought  I  was 
well  rid  of  him  ;  but  in  ten  minutes  he  was  back  again,  with 
half  a  dozen  blood-hounds  at  his  heels.  I  faced  them  coolly ; 
but  they  came  towards  me,  and  began  barking  fiercely,  and 
making  short  leaps  at  my  legs  and  body.  Grasping  my  sickle 
firmly,  T  prepared  for  tearing  times.  The  negro  woman,  see- 
ing my  predicament,  ran  for  the  man ;  and  he  came  just  in 
the  nick  of  time.  By  coaxing  and  blows,  he  got  them  away, 
and  enticed  them  off  to  the  swamp,  hunting.  In  a  short 
time  I  heard  their  deep  baying  in  the  distance,  and  felt  thank- 
ful their  attention  was  turned  in  another  direction.  The  old 
white  hound  soon  came  back,  and  lay  down  again  by  my  side ; 
and  the  dogs  also  came  back  after  a  while.  They  looked  at 
me  with  perplexity  on  their  faces  at  sight  of  the  old  hound, 
but  at  last  trotted  off,  and  left  me  unmolested. 

When  night  came,  I  went  to  one  of  the  cabins,  and,  sitting 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  205 

down  by  the  fire,  chatted  with  the  negroes.     As  I  did  not 

anticipate  any  further  use  for  the  sickle,  I  gave  it  to  one  of 

them.     They  were  much  pleased  with  it,  and,  I  suppose, 

with  me ;  for  they  paid  me  some  fine  compliments.     It  was 

well  I  got  out  of  the  South  as  soon  as  I  did;  for,  had  I  staid 

longer,  I  might  have  become  utterly  conceited.     However,  I 

tliink  the  negroes  spoke  so  often  of  my  personal  appearance 

because  their  masters  were  continually  telling  them  that  the 

Yankees  were  ogres  and  horrid  creatures;  and  I,  being  a 

Yankee,  was  a  living  refutation  of  the  slander,  which  they 

were  delighted  to  see.     The  masters  told  absurd  stories  of 

how  the  Yankees  treated  the  negroes ;  but,  with  a  very  few 

exceptions,   these   tales    were   utterly  discredited.      In  the 

course  of  my  journey,  two  or  three  darkies  asked  me  some 

absurd  and  rather  dubious  questions,  and,  on  my  answering 

them  satisfactorily,  seemed  to  have  a  great  load  lifted  from 

their  minds. 

About  nine  o'clock  at  night,  the  guide  and  I  started  for 
tlie  house  of  the  free  negro,  where  I  should  find  the  man 
who  would  show  me  to  our  pickets.  We  had  gone  about  a 
mile  and  a  half,  when  the  guide  suddenly  stopped,  and 
pointed  ahead.  I  could  see  the  forms  of  two  men  ;  and,  dodg- 
ing quietly  into  the  bushes,  we  waited  for  them  to  pass.     As 


206  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

they  were  going  by,  the  guide  made  a  sound  as  of  a  bird  dis- 
turbed in  its  nest;  and,  the  sound  being  answered  in  du- 
plicate, he  stepped  out  of  the  bushes,  and  spoke  to  them. 
One  of  them  was  the  man  whom  we  were  seeking.  When 
our  errand  was  explained,  he  seemed  reluctant  to  go  with 
me,  but,  after  questioning  me  a  while,  consented,  apologiz- 
ing for  his  reluctance  by  saying  that  negroes  had  to  be  mighty 
careful  in  these  times,  and  not  trust  every  one.  They  were 
liable  to  be  shot  if  seen  out  after  nine  o'clock,  and,  if 
caught  befriending  a  Yankee,  would  surely  be  put  to  death. 

The  man  was  going  to  the  house  from  which  we  had  just 
come,  but  turned  back  with  me.  I  bade  my  old  guide  good- 
by,  and  set  out  with  my  new  one,  going  through  forests  and 
swamps  by  what  seemed  impenetrable  paths,  and  coming  at 
length  to  a  clearins;,  in  the  centre  of  which  stood  a  double 
cabin.  It  was  the  house  of  my  companion.  We  entered 
it ;  and  the  guide  urged  another  man  who  was  there  to  ac- 
company us.  He  was  loath  to  doing  so  at  first,  but  finally 
consented.  We  went  on  about  two  miles  into  a  swamp,  the 
new-comer  hanging  back  all  the  way ;  and  then,  in  a  faint 
tone  of  voice,  he  said  he  did  not  want  to  go  any  farther. 
His  cowardice  infected  the  other,  who  also  backed  out,  and 
turned  to  go  backward. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  207 

Finding  they  would  absolutely  not  go  another  step,  I  got 
from  them  the  best  directions  I  could,  and  started  on  alone. 
The  night  was  so  very  dark,  that  the  negroes  had  kept  in  the 
path  with  great  difficulty,  and  only  by  groping  with  their 
sticks  for  the  somewhat  hardened  ground  of  the  pathway  :  so 
I  thought  my  chance  of  losing  myself  decidedly  favorable, 
and  went  on,  feeling  rather  blue.  They  said  that  in  a  clear- 
ing close  ahead  was  a  cabin,  where  a  free  man  named  Henry 
lived,  who,  they  thought,  would  guide  me  the  rest  of  my 
journey.  I  could  not  feel  angry  with  them  for  thus  deserting 
me ;  for  the  tramp  was  a  dangerous  one,  and  death  was  lit- 
erally behind  almost  every  bush.  I  thanked  them  heartily 
for  what  they  had  done,  and  we  parted ;  they  cautioning  me 
not  to  tell  the  man  Henry  that  they  had  guided  me ;  for  in 
these  times  it  was  best  not  to  trust  anybody,  unless  abso- 
lutely necessary. 

Managing  to  keep  in  the  path  by  using  the  negroes' 
method,  I  soon  came  to  the  clearing,  and  as  I  stood  by  the 
fence,  narrowly  inspecting  the  cabin,  heard  something  scam- 
per off  among  the  corn,  and  a  dog  spring  up,  and  go  bark- 
ing after  it.  It  startled  me  at  first ;  but  I  concluded  it  had 
nothing  to  do  with  me,  and  soon  all  became  quiet  again.  I 
could  see  gleams  of  light  through  the  logs  of  the  cabin,  and 


208  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

sparks  coming  out  into  the  darkness  as  if  from  a  chimney ; 
and,  making  my  way  very  quietly  around  the  building,  I 
knocked  at  the  door. 

A  dog  barked ;  and  presently  the  door  opened,  and  I  was 
admitted.  The  man  was  a  large  mulatto,  with  a  great  shock 
of  black  hair,  a  very  pretty  mulatto  wife,  and  several  hand- 
some children.  He  at  first  was  very  reserved  and  reticent ; 
and  indeed  continued  so,  in  a  degree,  during  the  whole  of  our 
interview.  I  tried  to  re-assure  him  ;  but  he  seemed  to  have 
marked  out  a  line  of  conduct  from  which  he  would  not  be 
swerved.  By  asking  a  great  many  questions,  I  elicited  from 
him  the  following  information :  That  our  pickets  had  been 
staying  about  two  miles  away,  at  a  place  called  "  Old  Shop 
Church,"  but  were  then,  he  had  been  told  by  a  Kebel, 
posted  on  another  road  still  farther  away.  He  did  not  know 
where  the  Rebels  were ;  they  might  be  here,  or  might  be 
there ;  and  there  was  no  telling  exactly  where  to  find  them, 
although  at  night  they  generally  kept  back  towards  the 
Jerusalem  Road.  He  declined  to  pilot  me  to  our  pickets, 
but,  after  a  time,  gave  me  as  full  dkections  as  he  could. 

He  asked  who  showed  me  the  way  to  his  cabin,  and,  when 
I  declined  to  tell,  said  he  thought  it  was  a  free  man  who 
lived  a  piece  back  in  a  double  cabin.     I  did  not  tell  him 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  209 

how  traly  he  had  conjectured,  but  let  him  have  the  benefit 
of  the  doubt. 

As  the  night  was  very  dark,  I  required  the  most  minute 
du-ections,  and,  boiTowing  a  pencil  from  the  man,  made  a 
plan  of  every  fence  on  my  route,  and  eveiy  turning  of  the 
path  I  was  to  follow.  I  studied  his  directions  until  I  was 
sure  I  should  not  mistake  my  way,  and  then  remarked  to 
my  host  that  I  would  sit  by  his  fire  a  while.  He  said  I  could 
if  I  pleased,  but  I  must  run  my  own  risk.  I  sat  a  mo- 
ment or  two  thinking  the  matter  over,  and  then  told  the  man 
I  would  start.  He  appeared  relieved,  and  pointed  out  the 
way  from  his  door.  He  was  still  reserved  and  reticent ;  and, 
being  fearful  he  might  betray  me,  I  hastened  on  as  fast  as 
I  could  in  the  thick  darkness. 

I  took  careful  note  of  the  landmarks  he  had  pointed  out, 
and  at  length  came  to  an  old  house  partly  in  ruins,  of  which 
he  had  spoken.  This  convinced  me  I  was  right  so  far ;  and, 
feeling  very  tired,  I  went  into  the  building,  and  lay  down  a 
while  in  a  corner  under  some  stairs.  Resting  somewhat,  I 
set  out  again,  and  got  lost  in  spite  of  myself.  Coming  soon 
upon  some  deserted  buildings,  I  carefully  reconnoitred  them, 
and,  entering  one,  waited  until  morning,  when  I  might  start 
anew  in  the  right  direction. 

14 


210  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

The  niglit  was  so  cloudy,  I  could  see  nothing  to  indicate  the 
points  of  the  compass ;  hut,  when  the  first  touch  of  red  in  the 
morning  sky  told  me  where  the  sun  was  rising,  I  set  out, 
and,  proceeding  as  rapidly  as  possible  in  a  north-east  direc- 
tion, presently  came  upon  a  deserted  cavalry  camp.  This 
the  mulatto  man  had  told  me  of;  and  I  felt  assured  I  had 
not  gone  far  out  of  the  way.  Scraps  of  blue  clothing  were 
scattered  about,  which  looked  like  old  friends. 

About  sunrise  I  arrived  at  "  Old  Shop  Church,"  called 
by  our  people  Sycamore  Church.  I  knew  it  must  be  the 
place,  and  approached  it  with  great  care,  the  negro  having 
said  there  might  be  scouts  of  either  party  in  its  vicinity ;  but, 
crawling  on  my  hands  and  knees  through  weeds  and  fences, 
I  found  it  deserted.  Its  pews  were  scattered  about  in  the  ad- 
joining grove,  and  the  whole  place  showed  evident  signs  of 
having  recently  been  a  camp.  The  road  to  which  our  troops 
had  withdrawn  was  to  the  north-east  of  the  church :  so  I  start- 
ed across  the  country  in  that  direction,  using  every  precaution 
to  keep  out  of  sight,  and  came  at  last  upon  the  right  road, 
and  soon  afterwards  upon  a  queer  fence  built  across  it  to 
stop  a  charge  of  cavalry. 

I  looked  every  moment  for  our  pickets,  but  kept  on  mile 
after  mile  without  finding  any,  and  after  a  time  passed  a  house 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  211 

wluch  answered  the  description  of  the  one  where  the  negro  said 
the  pickets  were  stationed ;  but  no  pickets  were  there.  How- 
ever, a  broad  new  trail  of  horses'  hoofs,  the  hoofs  turning 
from  the  enemy,  led  from  the  building.  I  did  not  know  what 
to  make  of  it.  The  trail  was  a  deep  one,  and  evidently  made 
by  a  large  body  of  cavalry.  It  was  quite  fresh ;  and  I  went 
rapidly  forward,  thinking  it  probable  the  Rebel  scouts  had 
not  yet  come  over  from  the  Jerusalem  Eoad.  I  passed  a 
number  of  deserted  camps,  most  of  them  rather  old,  and, 
about  nine  o'clock,  heard  very  heavy  firing  in  the  direction  of 
Petersburg.'  Having  been  at  Petersburg,  I  knew  that  firing 
did  not  always  indicate  a  battle ;  but  this  sounded  near  and 
far,  and  fluctuated  in  a  way  that  convinced  me  a  fierce  battle 
was  raging.  The  cannonading  was  at  times  absolutely  deaf- 
ening. 

Swinging  along  at  a  smart  pace,  I  soon  came  in  sight  of  a 
house  some  distance  from  the  road,  with  trees  in  front,  and  a 
high  broad  fence  all  around  it.  I  could  not  avoid  it  without 
a  long  detour,  and  hoped  to  get  by  unseen,  as  the  building 
was  surrounded  by  trees,  and  some  distance  back  from  the 
road.  Besides,  the  road  was  dug  or  worn  down  fully  two 
feet  below  the  surface,  with  a  Virginia  fence  on  either  side. 
I  had  drawn  quite  near  the  house,  when  suddenly  I  saw 


212  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

seated  near  the  garden  fence  two  Eebel  soldiers.  I  could 
not  go  back  without  running  great  risk  of  being  seen,  nor 
out  of  the  road  without  certainly  attracting  their  attention : 
so  I  went  upon  my  hands  and  knees,  and  crawled  by.  Luck- 
ily they  did  not  discover  me ;  perhaps  because  my  clothing 
was  of  the  color  of  the  ground,  and  I  partially  screened  by 
the  fence.  I  had  to  travel  in  this  manner  for  some  distance, 
but  at  last  came  to  a  piece  of  swampy  wood  on  the  right, 
and  entered  it  without  being  seen. 

Following  the  broad  trail  of  the  horses'  hoofs,  I  hurried 
forward,  the  heavy  firing  still  going  on,  sometimes  almost 
dying  away,  and  again  crashing  out  with  redoubled  vigor. 
I  came  at  length  to  a  railroad  which  I  thought  probably  led 
to  Suffolk  or  Norfolk.  I  was  very  anxious  to  find  some  ne- 
gro of  whom  to  learn  my  whereabouts,  and,  seeing  a  house  a 
short  distance  down  the  road,  went  near,  and  looked  about 
it  a  bit.  It  was  on  a  cart-road  some  ways  back  from  the  rail- 
road, and  two  or  three  barn-like  buildings  were  in  its  vicin- 
ity :  so  I  could  approach  quite  near  to  it  without  being  seen. 
In  a  shed  near  by,  I  found  several  scraps  of  papers ;  one 

of  them  ordering  Major ,  commanding  outpost  pickets,  to 

draw  in  his  force,  and  report  to  his  brigade  commander. 
The  paper  was  dated  the  day  before. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  213 

Approacliiiig  the  house,  I  saw  a  little  negro  girl  drawing 
water  at  a  well,  and,  seeing  no  signs  of  any  one  else,  beck- 
oned to  her  to  come  to  me.  Instead  of  coming,  she  ran  into 
the  house ;  and  I  was  debating  whether  to  run  or  not,  when 
a  fat  white  woman  came  to  the  door.  Advancing  to  the 
house,  I  spoke  to  her  in  the  Southern  style,  saying  I  was 
escaping  from  the  Yanks,  and  wanted  to  know  where  their 
pickets  were,  so  as  to  avoid  them.  She  seemed  delighted  to 
hear  I  had  got  away  from  the  Yankees,  and  told  me  to  go 
right  down  the  Norfolk  Railroad,  and  I  could  get  safely 
away.  I  thanked  her  warmly,  but  said  I  should  like  to 
know  just  where  the  Yankee  pickets  were,  as  it  would  be 
useful  information  to  carry  with  me.  She  replied  that  she 
wished  she  knew  ;  but  she  didn't.  All  she  could  say  was, 
that  "yesterday  they  were  all  about,  and  to  day  they  were 
all  gone ;  "  and  she  added,  "  Thar's  a  right  smart  chance  of 
slippin'  now,"  —  which  in  English  means  that  a  great  many 
persons  are  now  escaping. 

I  chatted  with  the  woman  for  a  while  longer.  She  said 
there  were  no  men  about  of  any  kind;  that  the  Rebels 
never  scouted  up  so  far ;  that  the  Yanks  had  been  there  all 
along ;  and  the  Rebels  would  not  be  likely  to  come,  now  that 
the  Yanks  were  gone.     The  old  woman's  generosity  did  not 


214  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE, 

keep  pace  with  her  Southern  patriotism.  I  could  not  get 
even  a  drink  of  milk  from  her ;  and,  just  as  I  was  going 
away,  I  let  fall  something  which  made  her  suspect  that  all 
was  not  right.  She  grew  very  thoughtful,  and  looked  a 
little  frightened ;  but  I  did  not  tell  her  the  truth,  —  she  was 
forlorn  enough  already.  I  bade  her  good-by  at  last ;  and  she 
stood  in  the  doorway  looking  after  me,  while  I  kept  straight 
on  by  the  road,  which,  she  said,  led  to  City  Point. 

As  I  was  going  through  a  swampy  place,  a  couple  of  splen- 
did wild  turkeys  flew  up  a  httle  ahead  of  me,  so  near  that 
I  could  easily  have  shot  one  of  them  if  I  had  had  a  gun. 
They  were  the  finest  I  ever  saw  ;  and,  as  they  flew,  up  over 
the  trees,  the  sun  struck  brilliant  flashes  of  green  from  their 
bright  plumage.  Soon  after,  I  came  upon  an  extensive  camp, 
which  had  been  deserted  but  a  few  hours.  There  were  light 
fortifications,  felled  trees,  and  abatis  planked  in  the  roads ; 
and  just  beyond  this  was  a  large  clearing  of  about  a  mile 
long,  with  three  or  four  plantations  scattered  through  it. 

I  reconnoitred  the  nearest  house  very  carefully.  A  gang 
of  negroes  were  at  work  near  it,  and  I  watched  them  some 
time ;  but  a  white  boy  was  with  them,  and  I  could  get  no 
chance  to  show  myself  to  the  negroes  without  being  seen  by 
the  boy.     They  were  going  back  and  forth,  gathering  corn; 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  215 

and,  as  they  went  down  the  road,  I  sprang  across  it,  and, 
concealing  myself  behind  a  log  near  the  fence,  tried  to  make 
them  see  me ;  but  they  looked  away,  while  the  boy's  eyes 
roved  all  about  the  premises.  I  could  get  no  chance  to 
speak  to  them,  and  soon  they  stopped  work  and  went  away,    i 

Then  I  crawled  along  under  the  fence,  near  the  large  gate, 
and  soon  saw  a  little  white  boy  coming  down  the  drive-way. 
I  sat  down  behind  the  gate,  and,  when  he  came  out,  used  all 
my  art  to  win  his  confidence,  and  draw  him  into  conversa- 
tion. I  succeeded;  and  he  sat  on  my  knee,  and  talked, 
while  I  asked  his  name  and  age  with  as  much  apparent 
interest  as  if  I  had  been  the  census-taker.  He  could  not 
speak  plainly ;  but  I  gathered  from  what  he  could  say  that 
a  sick  soldier  was  in  the  house,  and  that  he  wore  blue  clothes. 
The  little  fellow  didn't  seem  to  have  any  hatred  of  Yankees, 
and  I  thought  it  likely  ih^  family  was  of  Union  sentiments. 

The  boy  who  had  been  working  with  the  hands  then 
came  along,  two  negroes  with  him.  I  waited  for  them  ;  and 
they  were  surprised  to  see  the  little  boy  making  friends  with 
a  stranger.  After  a  few  careful  questions,  I  found  my  sur- 
mise was  correct.  The  boy's  father  was  a  soldier  in  our 
army.  The  soldier  in  the  house  was  a  United-States  safe- 
guard, to  protect  his  property  from  stragglers.     He  was  very 


2l6  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

sick,  —  so  sick  as  to  be  delirious.  I  knew  he  was  in  good 
hands,  and,  sending  ray  regards  to  madam,  started  for  the 
next  house,  where  they  told  me  was  another  safeguard.  My 
heart  beat  high  at  the  prospect  of  so  soon  seeing  a  Union 
soldier  and  the  good  old  blue. 

As  I  approached  the  house,  all  the  people  ran  out,  and 
among  them  appeared  the  dark-blue  uniform  of  a  United- 
States  soldier.  I  walked  up  to  the  gate  with  a  springing 
step  and  a  glad  face,  which  the  soldier  seemed  to  understand, 
for  he  shook  my  hands  heartily.  I  told  him  who  I  was,  and 
how  glad  I  was  to  see  one  like  him  once  more ;  and  then 
his  stolid  German  face  lighted  up,  and  he  gave  me  another 
hearty  shake  of  the  hand.  In  the  course  of  our  conversa- 
tion, he  said  that  a  bi*>;  battle  was  beino;  fought  below  Peters- 
burg,  beyond  the  ^Veldon  Railroad ;  and,  as  things  had 
changed  since  yesterday,  he  did  not  know  where  our  pickets 
were.  He  cautioned  me  to  look  out  for  deserters  from  our 
army  :  they  were  mean,  despicable  fellows,  and  might  trouble 
me. 

As  I  was  still  not  entirely  sure  of  reaching  our  pickets, 
I  left  my  name  and  address  with  the  Glerman ;  and  he  prom- 
ised to  write  to  my  friends  that  I  had  come  thus  far,  and  was 
well.     I  bade  him  good-]5y,  and,  after  various  trivial  inci- 


• 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  217 

dents,  arrived  at  wliat  had  been  Prince  George  Court  House. 
It  was  only  a  mass  of  ruins,  encircled  with  a  large,  deserted 
earthwork.  Several  roads  branched  from  it;  and,  taking 
the  one  in  a  north-east  direction,  I  hurried  forward.  The 
road  had  been  recently  marched  over,  as  the  many  foot- 
tracks,  and  the  books  and  papers  thrown  away  on  a  march, 
testified.  I  picked  up  some  of  the  books ;  but  they  were  of 
the  yellow-covered  order,  and  not  worth  carrying.  At  length 
I  came  to  an  immense  clearing,  with  a  road  leading  through 
it.  I  knew  this  was  quite  near  to  City  Point ;  for  I  heard 
the  whistle  of  engines,  and  knew  the  sound  must  come 
from  the  City-Point  and  Petersburg  Railroad.  Soon  I  saw 
a  wagon  with  one  or  two  women  in  it,  and  a  mounted  guard 
riding  alongside.  They  were  crossing  the  road  I  was  on ; 
and  I  hurried  forward,  and  shouted  to  the  soldier,  asking 
him  if  that  was  the  road  to  City  Point.  He  nodded,  and 
pointed  in  the  direction  I  was  going. 

About  two  miles  farther  on,  I  came  upon  a  number  of 
deserted  camps  and  buildings.  A  plantation  was  ahead,  evi- 
dently occupied.  The  house  was  a  long,  red  one,  surrounded 
with  negro  cabins ;  and,  as  I  approached  near,  I  saw  some- 
thing like  horses'  tails  switching  about  in  a  Httle  grove  be- 
yond it.     A  gentle  rise  of  ground  was  between  me  and  the 


218  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

house ;  and,  if  I  went  over  it,  I  should  be  seen.  I  did  not 
relish  being  shot  by  a  nervous  hundred-days'  man,  and  deter- 
mined to  come  upon  them  in  such  a  way  as  would  avoid  a 
challenge. 

Turning  off  to  the  left  among  the  negro  cabins,  I  asked  a 
negro  where  our  pickets  were.  He  looked  astonished,  and 
said,  "Why,  right  down  dar,"  pointing  to  the  grove  of  trees. 
Then  I  went  boldly  to  the  house,  and  asked  a  woman  if  she 
could  not  give  me  a  lunch.  I  wanted  to  enjoy  my  pleasurable 
feelings  as  long  as  possible,  and  no  doubt  acted  very  much  as 
a  cat  acts  when  playing  with  a  mouse.  She  told  me  to  go 
round  to  the  front  porch  (the  side  where  the  soldiers  were), 
and  she  would  give  me  something.  I  went  round,  and  sat 
down  in  the  porch. 

Four  United-States  soldiers  were  at  the  front  gate,  not  ten 
rods  from  me ;  and  they  stared  at  me,  but  made  no  motion 
to  come  towards  me.  I  waved  my  cap  to  them ;  but  they 
only  stared  the  harder.  A  little  girl  then  brought  me  a 
^  plate  of  pork  and  corn-bread,  and  I  tried  to  eat;  but  my 
appetite  was  gone.  Stuffing  the  food  into  my  pocket,  I 
handed  back  the  plate  with  my  thanks,  and  started  down 
towards  the  pickets.  They  looked  queerly  at  me,  and, 
when  I  told  them  who  I  was,  were  all  mouths  and  eyes. 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  219 

One  of  them  drew  bis  sabre,  and  said  be  would  accompany 
me  to  tbe  guard-quarters.  We  went  into  tbe  grove,  and 
tbere  about  fifty  men  crowded  around  to  learn  wbo  and  what 
I  was.  Tbey  were  very  jubilant  wben  I  told  them  ;  and  one 
of  them  shouted  out  that  he,  too,  was  from  Massachusetts,  as 
if  he  was  proud  of  it. 

They  furnished  me  a  horse ;  and,  escorted  by  a  major  and 
a  corporal,  I  soon  rode  into  headquarters  at  City  Point. 
Several  amusing  incidents  occurred  on  the  way ;  but  I  have 
not  space  to  relate  them.  The  corporal  was  several  times 
cautioned  to  "look  out  for  me;  "  and  we  laughed,  but  did 
not  stop  to  enlighten  every  one. 

I  was  taken  to  General  Benham's  headquarters,  and  soon 
convinced  him  that  I  was  all  right.  The  general  greeted 
me  very  cordially,  and  immediately  installed  me  as  his  guest. 
I  had  a  good  dinner,  and  was  introduced  to  the  general's 
staff.  One  of  them  —  Captain  Channing  Clapp,  of  Boston — 
took  particular  charge  of  me ;  giving  me  his  bed  in  spite  of 
me,  and  sleeping  on  the  floor.  He  also  gave  me  his  room 
while  I  took  a  bath  and  changed  my  clothing,  —  he  furnish- 
ing a  new  shirt  and  stockings,  and  a  vest,  blouse,  and  pa- 
per-collar. This  latter,  however,  I  soon  grew  tu-ed  of,  and 
slyly  took  off. 


220  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

I  tried  to  rest  a  little,  and  laid  down  for  an  hour,  but  could 
not  sleep, — I  was  so  filled  with  thoughts  of  home.  I 
supped  with  General  Benham,  who,  I  found,  knew  some 
Dorchester  people,  and  understood  very  well  where  I  lived. 
In  the  evening,  I  went  with  Captain  Clapp  to  General  Pat- 
rick's quarters,  and  he  asked  me  a  great  many  questions 
relative  to  the  Hehels.  At  last  I  went  to  bed,  but  did  not 
^et  to  sleep  until  after  midniglit,  there  being  such  a  terrible 
thunder  of  cannon.  The  ojQficers  said  it  was  one  of  the  heav- 
iest cannonadings  they  had  heard.  The  sound  at  times  was 
truly  grand,  ruiging  up  and  down  the  lino  all  the  way  from 
the  Appomattox  to  the  Weldon  Railroad. 

Our  officers  were  afraid  the  Rebels  were  trying  to  pierce 
our  lines,  and,  for  a  time,  felt  some  concern,  as  the  works 
were  thinly  manned ;  Grant  having  taken  away  all  the  spare 
men.  They  said,  that,  so  long  as  the  cannonading  was  kept 
up,  we  might  know  all  was  right ;  and,  after  the  firing  had 
gone  on  some  time,  they  concluded  it  was  all  right  sure ;  for 
the  lines  would  have  been  broken  before,  if  they  could  have 
been  broken  at  all. 

The  next  morning,  General  Grant  sent  his  adjutant  to  tell 
me  he  desired  to  see  me.  Captain  Clapp  and  I  had  drawn 
up  a  request  for  a  furlough,  which  had  been  signed  by  Gen- 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  221 

erals  Benham  and  Patrick;  and,  taking  this  with  us,  we 
went  over  to  see  the  general.  He  was  not  at  his  quarters 
just  then  ;  and,  his  adjutant-general  approving  the  furlough, 
I  went  over  to  the  provost-marshal's  to  get  it  stamped 
for  Washington,  while  Captain  Clapp  went  for  my  clothes, 
so  I  should  not  lose  the  boat,  which  went  to  Washington  at 
half-past  ten,  a.m. 

When  I  went  back  to  the  general's,  my  things  were  there, 
and  I  was  all  ready  to  start  as  soon  as  I  had  seen  him.  A 
French  general  and  his  aide  were  in  waiting ;  and  I  was  intro- 
duced to  them  by  Colonel  Hopkins,  the  adjutant-general. 
They  acted  as  if  they  thought  I  was  General  G-rant  himself; 
bowing  and  scraping,  and  pulling  off  then'  hats  to  me  in  a 
grand  fashion.  They  were  covered  with  gold  lace  ;  and  the 
general  had  half  a  dozen  different  orders  pinned  to  his 
breast,  and  probably  was  a  person  of  some  consequence. 
They  had  been  announced  to  the  general,  and  now  went 
down  to  see  him. 

I  was  introduced  to  General  Thomas  and  others  while 
waiting  for  their  return.  I  told  Colonel  Hopkins  I  did  not 
believe  the  general  would  want  to  see  me  now  that  he  had 
such  distinguished  company.  The  colonel  laughed,  and  said 
the  general  would  get  rid  of  the  Frenchman  very  quickly. 


222  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

They  soon  after  left,  and  I  was  introduced  to  the  general. 
He  raised  his  hat  and  shook  hands  with  me,  saying  he  was 
glad  I  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  get  away  from  the  Rebels. 
We  then  conversed  about  the  Rebels,  I  tellmg  him  all  I 
knew  about  them. 

I  talked  with  him  about  half  an  hour.  He  said  the  can- 
nonading of  the  night  before  was  occasioned  by  an  attack  of 
our  men  on  a  Rebel  fort,  which  they  took,  capturing  a 
colonel,  major,  captain,  and  about  seventy-five  men,  and  then 
returning  to  our  lines.  The  Rebels  were  afraid  of  another 
attack ;  and,  as  the  night  was  very  dark,  the  only  way  they 
could  prevent  it  was  to  keep  firing,  whether  there  was  any 
thing  to  fire  at  or  not.  Our  artillery  answered  them;  and, 
altogether,  a  great  deal  of  powder  was  burned,  without  many 
being  hurt  on  either  side. 

When  I  had  told  the  general  all  I  could  think  of,  I  said 
so ;  and  again  congratulating  me,  and  wishing  me  a  pleasant 
time  at  home,  he  bade  me  good-by,  shaking  my  hand  cor- 
dially, and  saying  the  boat  was  waiting.  I  ran  down  to  the 
landing,  and  went  aboard. 

Soon  after,  the  boat  started  ;  and,  in  course  of  conversation 
with  an  officer,  he  said  General  Grant  had  sent  down  an 
orderly  to  keep  the  boat  waiting,  and  that  we  had  not  started 


OVERLAND    TRAVEL.  223 

on  time.  I  did  not  say  any  thing,  but  thought  it  possible  the 
general  had  detained  the  boat  for  me.  If  he  did  so,  it  was  a 
thoughtful  act,  as,  if  it  had  gone  without  me,  I  should  have 
been  compelled  to  wait  there  another  day.  Captain  Clapp, 
just  before  I  took  leave  of  him,  loaned  me  twenty-five  dol- 
lars; and  I  arrived  at  Washington  with  no  trouble. 

Many  of  the  passengers  were  very  kind ;  one  gentleman 
pressing  me  to  go  home  with  him,  and  saying  he  would  fur- 
nish me  with  as  much  money  as  I  wished.  I  would  not  take 
any ;  but  he  insisted  on  paying' for  my  meals  on  the  boat.  I 
thought,  when  I  first  arrived  at  "Washington,  I  would  go 
to  the  headquarters  of  transportation,  and  get  a  free  passage 
home ;  but  I  found  it  would  take  some  time,  and,  being  very 
impatient  to  get  home,  bought  my  ticket,  and,  after  sending 
home  a  telegram  to  my  folks,  took  my  seat  in  the  cars  for 
j^few  York.  As  I  passed  through  the  gate  to  go  to  the  cars, 
an  officer  asked  m€ffor  my  pass,  and,  when  he  had  read  it, 
smiled  slyly,  and  asked  if  I  was  in  the  secret  service.  He 
looked  puzzled  ;  but  I  could  not  chat  with  every  one  ;  and,  if 
he  has  not  forgotten  me,  he  is  probably  puzzled  still.  My 
queer  appearance  attracted  attention ;  and  a  good  many  peo- 
ple introduced  themselves  to  me,  and  made  my  trip  to  New 
York  quite  pleasant. 


224  ADRIFT  IN  DIXIE. 

I  arrived  at  Boston  before  sunrise  in  tlie  morning.  No 
cars  were  going  to  my  home  for  over  an  hour :  so  I  set  out 
on  foot.  I  stepped  into  a  neighbor's  yard,  and  he  went  to 
tell  my  folks  I  was  coming.  I  knew  my  mother  was  weak 
and  nervous,  and  did  not  wish  to  shock  her  by  any  great 
surprise.  I  went  home  in  a  few  minutes ;  and  the  folks  were 
very  glad  to  see  me,  judging  from  their  actions.  I  was  just 
as  glad  to  see  them,  and  we  were  a  happy  set. 


THE     END. 