NAT   TURNER'S   INSURRECTION 


the  year  1831,  up  to  the  23d  of 
August,  the  Virginia  newspapers  seem 
to  have  been  absorbed  in  the  momentous  prob 
lems  which  then  occupied  the  minds  of  intelli 
gent  American  citizens  :  What  Gen.  Jackson 
should  do  with  the  scolds,  and  what  with  the 
disreputables?  should  South  Carolina  be  al 
lowed  to  nullify  ?  and  would  the  wives  of  cabi 
net  ministers  call  on  Mrs.  Eaton?  It  is  an 
unfailing  opiate  to  turn  over  the  drowsy  files 
of  the  Richmond  Enquirer,  until  the  moment 
when  those  dry  and  dusty  pages  are  suddenly 
kindled  into  flame  by  the  torch  of  Nat  Turner. 
Then  the  terror  flared  on  increasing,  until  the 
remotest  Southern  States  were  found  shudder 
ing  at  nightly  rumors  of  insurrection  ;  until  far- 
off  European  colonies  —  Antigua,  Martinique, 
Caraccas,  Tortola  —  recognized  by  some  secret 

276 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  277 

sympathy  the  same  epidemic  alarms ;  until  the 
very  boldest  words  of  freedom  were  reported 
as  uttered  in  the  Virginia  House  of  Delegates 
with  unclosed  doors ;  until  an  obscure  young 
man  named  Garrison  was  indicted  at  common 
law  in  North  Carolina,  and  had  a  price  set 
upon  his  head  by  the  Legislature  of  Georgia. 
Near  the  south-eastern  border  of  Virginia,  in 
Southampton  County,  there  is  a  neighborhood 
known  as  "The  Cross  Keys."  It  lies  fifteen 
miles  from  Jerusalem,  the  county -town,  or 
"  court-house,"  seventy  miles  from  Norfolk,  and 
about  as  far  from  Richmond.  It  is  some  ten  or 
fifteen  miles  from  Murfreesborough  in  North 
Carolina,  and  about  twenty-five  from  the  Great 
Dismal  Swamp.  Up  to  Sunday,  the  21st  of 
August,  1831,  there  was  nothing  to  distinguish 
it  from  any  other  rural,  lethargic,  slipshod  Vir 
ginia  neighborhood,  with  the  due  allotment  of 
mansion-houses  and  log  huts,  tobacco-fields  and 
44  old-fields,"  horses,  dogs,  negroes,  "  poor  white 
folks,"  so  called,  and  other  white  folks,  poor 
without  being  called  so.  One  of  these  last  was 
Joseph  Travis,  who  had  recently  married  the 


278  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

widow  of  one  Putnam  Moore,  and  had  unfortu 
nately  wedded  to  himself  her  negroes  also. 

In  the  woods  on  the  plantation  of  Joseph 
Travis,  upon  the  Sunday  just  named,  six  slaves 
met  at  noon  for  what  is  called  in  the  Northern 
States  a  picnic,  and  in  the  Southern  a  bar 
becue.  The  bill  of  fare  was  to  be  simple :  one 
brought  a  pig,  and  another  some  brandy,  giving 
to  the  meeting  an  aspect  so  cheaply  convivial 
that  no  one  would  have  imagined  it  to  be  the 
final  consummation  of  a  conspiracy  which  had 
been  for  six  months  in  preparation.  In  this 
plot  four  of  the  men  had  been  already  ini 
tiated,  —  Henry,  Hark  or  Hercules,  Nelson,  and 
Sam.  Two  others  were  novices,  Will  and  Jack 
by  name.  The  party  had  remained  together 
from  twelve  to  three  o'clock,  when  a  seventh 
man  joined  them,  —  a  short,  stout,  powerfully 
built  person,  of  dark  mulatto  complexion,  and 
strongly  marked  African  features,  but  with  a 
face  full  of  expression  and  resolution.  This 
was  Nat  Turner. 

He  was  at  this  time  nearly  thirty-one  years 
old,  having  been  born  on  the  2d  of  October, 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  279 

1800.  He  had  belonged  originally  to  Benjamin 
Turner,  —  from  whom  he  took  his  last  name, 
slaves  having  usually  no  patronymic ;  —  had 
then  been  transferred  to  Putnam  Moore,  and 
then  to  his  present  owner.  He  had,  by  his 
own  account,  felt  himself  singled  out  from 
childhood  for  some  great  work;  and  he  had 
some  peculiar  marks  on  his  person,  which, 
joined  to  his  mental  precocity,  were  enough 
to  occasion,  among  his  youthful  companions,  a 
superstitious  faith  in  his  gifts  and  destiny.  He 
had  some  mechanical  ingenuity  also ;  experi 
mentalized  very  early  in  making  paper,  gun 
powder,  pottery,  and  in  other  arts,  which,  in 
later  life,  he  was  found  thoroughly  to  under 
stand.  His  moral  faculties  appeared  strong,  so 
that  white  witnesses  admitted  that  he  had  never 
been  known  to  swear  an  oath,  to  drink  a  drop 
of  spirits,  or  to  commit  a  theft.  And,  in  gen 
eral,  so  marked  were  his  early  peculiarities 
that  people  said  "he  had  too  much  sense  to  be 
raised  ;  and,  if  he  was,  he  would  never  be  of 
any  use  as  a  slave."  This  impression  of  per 
sonal  destiny  grew  with  his  growth :  he  fasted, 


280  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

prayed,  preached,  read  the  Bible,  heard  voices 
when  he  walked  behind  his  plough,  and  com 
municated  his  revelations  to  the  awe-struck 
slaves.  They  told  him,  in  return,  that,  "  if 
they  had  his  sense,  they  would  not  serve  any 
master  in  the  world." 

The  biographies  of  slaves  can  hardly  be  indi 
vidualized  ;  they  belong  to  the  class.  We  know 
bare  facts ;  it  is  only  the  general  experience 
of  human  beings  in  like  condition  which  can 
clothe  them  with  life.  The  outlines  are  certain, 
the  details  are  inferential.  Thus,  for  instance, 
we  know  that  Nat  Turner's  young  wife  was  a 
slave ;  we  know  that  she  belonged  to  a  different 
master  from  himself;  we  know  little  more  than 
this,  but  this  is  much.  For  this  is  equivalent 
to  saying,  that,  by  day  or  by  night,  her  hus 
band  had  no  more  power  to  protect  her  than  the 
man  who  lies  bound  upon  a  plundered  vessel's 
deck  has  power  to  protect  his  wife  on  board 
the  pirate  schooner  disappearing  in  the  horizon. 
She  may  be  well  treated,  she  may  be  outraged  ; 
it  is  in  the  powerlessness  that  the  agony  lies. 
There  is,  indeed,  one  thing  more  which  we  do 


NAT   TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  281 

know  of  this  young  woman :  the  Virginia  news 
papers  state  that  she  was  tortured  under  the 
lash,  after  her  husband's  execution,  to  make 
her  produce  his  papers:  this  is  all. 

What  his  private  experiences  and  special 
privileges  or  wrongs  may  have  been,  it  is 
therefore  now  impossible  to  say.  Travis  was 
declared  to  be  "  more  humane  and  fatherly  to 
his  slaves  than  any  man  in  the  county;"  but 
it  is  astonishing  how  often  this  phenomenon 
occurs  in  the  contemporary  annals  of  slave 
insurrections.  The  chairman  of  the  county 
court  also  stated,  in  pronouncing  sentence,  that 
Nat  Turner  had  spoken  of  his  master  as  "  only 
too  indulgent ;  "  but  this,  for  some  reason,  does 
not  appear  in  his  printed  Confession,  which  only 
says,  "  He  was  a  kind  master,  and  placed  the 
greatest  confidence  in  me."  It  is  very  possible 
that  it  may  have  been  so,  but  the  printed 
accounts  of  Nat  Turner's  person  look  suspi 
cious  :  he  is  described  in  Gov.  Floyd's  procla 
mation  as  having  a  scar  on  one  of  his  temples, 
also  one  on  the  back  of  his  neck,  and  a  large 
knot  on  one  of  the  bones  of  his  right  arm, 


282  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

produced  by  a  blow ;  and  although  these  were 
explained  away  in  Virginia  newspapers  as  hav 
ing  been  produced  by  fights  with  his  compan 
ions,  yet  such  affrays  are  entirely  foreign  to 
the  admitted  habits  of  the  man.  It  must 
therefore  remain  an  open  question,  whether  the 
scars  and  the  knot  were  produced  by  black 
hands  or  by  white. 

Whatever  Nat  Turner's  experiences  of  slavery 
might  have  been,  it  is  certain  that  his  plans 
were  not  suddenly  adopted,  but  that  he  had 
brooded  over  them  for  years.  To  this  day 
there  are  traditions  among  the  Virginia  slaves 
of  the  keen  devices  of  "Prophet  Nat."  If  he 
was  caught  with  lime  and  lampblack  in  hand, 
conning  over  a  half-finished  county-map  on  the 
barn-door,  he  was  always  "  planning  what  to  do 
if  he  were  blind ; "  or,  "  studying  how  to  get 
to  Mr.  Francis's  house."  When  he  had  called 
a  meeting  of  slaves,  and  some  poor  whites  came 
eavesdropping,  the  poor  whites  at  once  became 
the  subjects  for  discussion :  he  incidentally 
mentioned  that  the  masters  had  been  heard 
threatening  to  drive  them  away ;  one  slave  had 


NAT   TURNER'S    INSURRECTION  283 

been  ordered  to  shoot  Mr.  Jones's  pigs,  another 
to  tear  down  Mr.  Johnson's  fences.  The  poor 
whites,  Johnson  and  Jones,  ran  home  to  see  to 
their  homesteads,  and  were  better  friends  than 
ever  to  Prophet  Nat. 

lie  never  was  a  Baptist  preacher,  though 
such  vocation  has  often  been  attributed  to  him. 
The  impression  arose  from  his  having  immersed 
himself,  during  one  of  his  periods  of  special 
enthusiasm,  together  with  a  poor  white  man 
named  Brantley.  "  About  this  time,"  he  says 
in  his  Confession,  "  I  told  these  things  to  a 
white  man,  on  whom  it  had  a  wonderful  effect; 
and  he  ceased  from  his  wickedness,  and  was 
attacked  immediately  with  a  cutaneous  erup 
tion,  and  the  blood  oozed  from  the  pores  of  his 
skin,  and  after  praying  and  fasting  nine  days 
he  was  healed.  And  the  Spirit  appeared  to 
me  again,  and  said,  as  the  Saviour  had  been 
baptized,  so  should  we  be  also ;  and  when  the 
white  people  would  not  let  us  be  baptized 
by  the  church,  we  went  down  into  the  water 
together,  in  the  sight  of  many  who  reviled  us, 
and  were  baptized  by  the  Spirit.  After  this 
I  rejoiced  greatly,  and  gave  thanks  to  God." 


284  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

The  religious  hallucinations  narrated  in  his 
Confession  seem  to  have  been  as  genuine  as 
the  average  of  such  things,  and  are  very  well 
expressed.  The  account  reads  quite  like  Jacob 
Behmen.  He  saw  white  spirits  and  black  spirits 
contending  in  the  skies ;  the  sun  was  darkened, 
the  thunder  rolled.  "  And  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
with  me,  and  said,  4  Behold  me  as  I  stand  in 
the  heavens  ! '  And  I  looked,  and  saw  the  forms 
of  men  in  different  attitudes.  And  there  were. 
lights  in  the  sky,  to  which  the  children  of  dark 
ness  gave  other  names  than  what  they  really 
were ;  for  they  were  the  lights  of  the  Saviour's 
hands,  stretched  forth  from  east  to  west,  even 
as  they  were  extended  on  the  cross  on  Calvary, 
for  the  redemption  of  sinners."  He  saw  drops 
of  blood  on  the  corn  :  this  was  Christ's  blood, 
shed  for  man.  He  saw  on  the  leaves  in  the 
woods  letters  and  numbers  and  figures  of  men, 
—  the  same  symbols  which  he  had  seen  in  the 
skies.  On  May  12,  1828,  the  Holy  Spirit 
appeared  to  him,  and  proclaimed  that  the  yoke 
of  Jesus  must  fall  on  him,  and  he  must  fight 
against  the  serpent  when  the  sign  appeared. 


NAT    TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  285 

Then  came  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  February, 
1831 :  this  was  the  sign  ;  then  he  must  arise 
and  prepare  himself,  and  slay  his  enemies  with 
their  own  weapons ;  then  also  the  seal  was 
removed  from  his  lips,  and  then  he  confided  his 
plans  to  four  associates. 

When  he  came,  therefore,  to  the  barbecue  on 
the  appointed  Sunday,  and  found  riot  these 
four  only,  but  two  others,  his  first  question  to 
the  intruders  was,  how  they  came  thither.  To 
this  Will  answered  manfully,  that  his  life  was 
worth  no  more  than  the  others,  and  "  his  liberty 
was  as  dear  to  him."  This  admitted  him  to 
confidence ;  and  as  Jack  was  known  to  be 
entirely  under  Hark's  influence,  the  strangers 
were  no  bar  to  their  discussion.  Eleven  hours 
they  remained  there,  in  anxious  consultation : 
one  can  imagine  those  dusky  faces,  beneath 
the  funereal  woods,  and  amid  the  flickering  of 
pine-knot  torches,  preparing  that  stern  revenge 
whose  shuddering  echoes  should  ring  through 
the  land  so  long.  Two  things  were  at  last 
decided :  to  begin  their  work  that  night ;  and 
to  begin  it  with  a  massacre  so  swift  and  irre- 


286  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

sistible  as  to  create  in  a  few  days  more  terror 
than  many  battles,  and  so  spare  the  need  of 
future  bloodshed.  "  It  was  agreed  that  we 
should  commence  at  home  on  that  night,  and, 
until  we  had  armed  and  equipped  ourselves 
and  gained  sufficient  force,  neither  age  nor  sex 
was  to  be  spared :  which  was  invariably  ad 
hered  to." 

John  Brown  invaded  Virginia  with  nineteen 
men,  and  with  the  avowed  resolution  to  take  no 
life  but  in  self-defence.  Nat  Turner  attacked 
Virginia  from  within,  with  six  men,  and  with 
the  determination  to  spare  no  life  until  his 
power  was  established.  John  Brown  intended 
to  pass  rapidly  through  Virginia,  and  then 
retreat  to  the  mountains.  Nat  Turner  in 
tended  to  "  conquer  Southampton  County  as 
the  white  men  did  in  the  Revolution,  and  then 
retreat,  if  necessary,  to  the  Dismal  Swamp." 
Each  plan  was  deliberately  matured ;  each  was 
in  its  way  practicable ;  but  each  was  defeated 
by  a  single  false  step,  as  will  soon  appear. 

We  must  pass  over  the  details  of  horror, 
as  they  occurred  during  the  next  twenty-four 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  287 

hours.  Swift  and  stealthy  as  Indians,  the  black 
men  passed  from  house  to  house,  —  not  pausing, 
not  hesitating,  as  their  terrible  work  went  on. 
In  one  thing  they  were  humaner  than  Indians, 
or  than  white  men  fighting  against  Indians : 
there  was  no  gratuitous  outrage  beyond  the 
death-blow  itself,  no  insult,  no  mutilation ;  but 
in  every  house  they  entered,  that  blow  fell  on 
man,  woman,  and  child,  —  nothing  that  had  a 
white  skin  was  spared.  From  every  house 
they  took  arms  and  ammunition,  and  from  a 
few  money.  On  every  plantation  they  found 
recruits :  those  dusky  slaves,  so  obsequious  to 
their  master  the  day  before,  so  prompt  to  sing 
and  dance  before  his  Northern  visitors,  were 
all  swift  to  transform  themselves  into  fiends 
of  retribution  now ;  show  them  sword  or 
musket,  and  they  grasped  it,  though  it  were 
an  heirloom  from  Washington  himself.  The 
troop  increased  from  house  to  house,  —  first  to 
fifteen,  then  to  forty,  then  to  sixty.  Some  were 
armed  with  muskets,  some  with  axes,  some  with 
scythes  some  came  on  their  masters'  horses. 
As  the  numbers  increased,  they  could  be 


288  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

divided,  and  the  awful  work  was  carried  on 
more  rapidly  still.  The  plan  then  was  for  an 
advanced  guard  of  horsemen  to  approach  each 
house  at  a  gallop,  and  surround  it  till  the  others 
came  up.  Meanwhile,  what  agonies  of  terror 
must  have  taken  place  within,  shared  alike  by 
innocent  and  by  guilty !  what  memories  of 
wrongs  inflicted  on  those  dusky  creatures,  by 
some,  —  what  innocent  participation,  by  others, 
in  the  penance !  The  outbreak  lasted  for  but 
forty-eight  hours ;  but,  during  that  period,  fifty- 
five  whites  Avere  slain,  without  the  loss  of  a 
single  slave. 

One  fear  was  needless,  which  to  many  a  hus 
band  and  father  must  have  intensified  the  last 
struggle.  These  negroes  had  been  systemati 
cally  brutalized  from  childhood  ;  they  had  been 
allowed  no  legalized  or  permanent  marriage ; 
they  had  beheld  around  them  an  habitual 
licentiousness,  such  as  can  scarcely  exist  except 
under  slavery ;  some  of  them  had  seen  their 
wives  and  sisters  habitually  polluted  by  the 
husbands  and  the  brothers  of  these  fair  white 
women  who  were  now  absolutely  in  their  power. 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  289 

Yet  I  have  looked  through  the  Virginia  news 
papers  of  that  time  in  vain  for  one  charge  of 
an  indecent  outrage  on  a  woman  against  these 
triumphant  and  terrible  slaves.  Wherever  they 
went,  there  went  death,  and  that  was  all.  It 
is  reported  by  some  of  the  contemporary  news 
papers,  that  a  portion  of  this  abstinence  was 
the  result  of  deliberate  consultation  among 
the  insurrectionists ;  that  some  of  them  were 
resolved  on  taking  the  white  women  for  wives, 
but  were  overruled  by  Nat  Turner.  If  so,  he 
is  the  only  American  slave-leader  of  whom  we 
know  certainly  that  he  rose  above  the  ordinary 
level  of  slave  vengeance ;  and  Mrs.  Stowe's 
picture  of  D red's  purposes  is  then  precisely 
typical  of  his :  "  Whom  the  Lord  saith  unto 
us,  '  Smite,'  them  will  we  smite.  We  will  not 
torment  them  with  the  scourge  and  fire,  nor 
defile  their  women  as  they  have  done  with  ours. 
But  we  will  slay  them  utterly,  and  consume 
them  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth." 

When  the  number  of  adherents  had  increased 
to  fifty  or  sixty,  Nat  Turner  judged  it  time  to 
strike  at  the  county-seat,  Jerusalem.  Thither 


290  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

a  few  white  fugitives  had  already  fled,  and 
couriers  might  thence  be  despatched  for  aid 
to  Richmond  and  Petersburg,  unless  promptly 
intercepted.  Besides,  he  could  there  find  arms, 
ammunition,  and  money;  though  they  had  al 
ready  obtained,  it  is  dubiously  reported,  from 
eight  hundred  to  one  thousand  dollars.  On 
the  way  it  was  necessary  to  pass  the  plantation 
of  Mr.  Parker,  three  miles  from  Jerusalem. 
Some  of  the  men  wished  to  stop  here  and  enlist 
some  of  their  friends.  Nat  Turner  objected,  as 
the  delay  might  prove  dangerous ;  he  yielded 
at  last,  and  it  proved  fatal. 

He  remained  at  the  gate  with  six  or  eight 
men  ;  thirty  or  forty  went  to  the  house,  half  a 
mile  distant.  They  remained  too  long,  and  he 
went  alone  to  hasten  them.  During  his  absence 
a  party  of  eighteen  white  men  came  up  sud 
denly,  dispersing  the  small  guard  left  at  the 
gate;  and  when  the  main  body  of  slaves 
emerged  from  the  house,  they  encountered,  for 
the  first  time,  their  armed  masters.  The  blacks 
halted  ;  the  whites  advanced  cautiously  within  a 
hundred  yards,  and  fired  a  volley ;  on  its  being 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  291 

returned,  they  broke  into  disorder,  and  hur 
riedly  retreated,  leaving  some  wounded  on  the 
ground.  The  retreating  whites  were  pursued, 
and  were  saved  only  by  falling  in  with  another 
band  of  fresh  men  from  Jerusalem,  with  whose 
aid  they  turned  upon  the  slaves,  who  in  their 
turn  fell  into  confusion.  Turner,  Hark,  and 
about  twenty  men  on  horseback  retreated  in 
some  order ;  the  rest  were  scattered.  The 
leader  still  planned  to  reach  Jerusalem  by  a 
private  way,  thus  evading  pursuit ;  but  at  last 
decided  to  stop  for  the  night,  in  the  hope  of 
enlisting  additional  recruits. 

During  the  night  the  number  increased  again 
to  forty,  and  they  encamped  on  Major  Ridley's 
plantation.  An  alarm  took  place  during  the 
darkness,  —  whether  real  or  imaginary,  does  not 
appear, — and  the  men  became  scattered  again. 
Proceeding  to  make  fresh  enlistments  with  the 
daylight,  they  were  resisted  at  Dr.  Blunt's 
house,  where  his  slaves,  under  his  orders,  fired 
upon  them ;  and  this,  with  a  later  attack  from  a 
party  of  white  men  near  Capt.  Harris's,  so  broke 
up  the  whole  force  that  they  never  re-united. 


292  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

The  few  who  remained  together  agreed  to  sepa 
rate  for  a  few  hours  to  see  if  any  thing  could  be 
done  to  revive  the  insurrection,  and  meet  again 
that  evening  at  their  original  rendezvous.  But 
they  never  reached  it. 

Gloomily  came  Nat  Turner  at  nightfall  into 
those  gloomy  woods  where  forty-eight  hours 
before  he  had  revealed  the  details  of  his  terrible 
plot  to  his  companions.  At  the  outset  all  his 
plans  had  succeeded  ;  every  thing  was  as  lie 
predicted :  the  slaves  had  come  readily  at  his 
call ;  the  masters  had  proved  perfectly  defence 
less.  Had  he  not  been  persuaded  to  pause  at 
Parker's  plantation,  he  would  have  been  master 
before  now  of  the  arms  and  ammunition  at 
Jerusalem ;  and  with  these  to  aid,  and  the 
Dismal  Swamp  for  a  refuge,  he  might  have  sus 
tained  himself  indefinitely  against  his  pursuers. 

Now  the  blood  Avas  shed,  the  risk  was 
incurred,  his  friends  were  killed  or  captured, 
and  all  for  what  ?  Lasting  memories  of  terror, 
to  be  sure,  for  his  oppressors ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  hopeless  failure  for  the  insurrection,  and 
certain  death  for  him.  What  a  watch  he  must 


NAT   TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  293 

have  kept  that  night !  To  that  excited  imagina 
tion,  which  had  always  seen  spirits  in  the  sky 
and  blood-drops  on  the  corn  and  hieroglyphic 
marks  011  the  dry  leaves,  how  full  the  lonely 
forest  must  have  been  of  signs  and  solemn 
warnings !  Alone  with  the  fox's  bark,  the 
rabbit's  rustle,  and  the  screech-owl's  scream,  the 
self-appointed  prophet  brooded  over  his  despair. 
Once  creeping  to  the  edge  of  the  wood,  he  saw 
men  stealthily  approach  on  horseback.  He 
fancied  them  some  of  his  companions ;  but 
before  he  dared  to  whisper  their  ominous  names, 
"  Hark  "  or  "  Dred,"  —  for  the  latter  was  the 
name,  since  famous,  of  one  of  his  more  recent 
recruits,  —  he  saw  them  to  be  white  men,  and 
shrank  back  stealthily  beneath  his  covert. 

There  he  waited  two  days  and  two  nights, — 
long  enough  to  satisfy  himself  that  no  one 
would  rejoin  him,  and  that  the  insurrection  had 
hopelessly  failed.  The  determined,  desperate 
spirits  who  had  shared  his  plans  were  scattered 
forever,  and  longer  delay  would  be  destruction 
for  him  also.  He  found  a  spot  which  he  judged 
safe,  dug  a  hole  under  a  pile  of  fence-rails  in  a 


294       TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

field,  and  lay  there  for  six  weeks,  only  leaving 
it  for  a  few  moments  at  midnight  to  obtain 
water  from  a  neighboring  spring.  Food  he  had 
previously  provided,  without  discovery,  from  a 
house  near  by. 

Meanwhile  an  unbounded  variety  of  rumors 
went  flying  .through  the  State.  The  express 
which  first  reached  the  governor  announced 
that  the  militia  were  retreating  before  the 
slaves.  An  express  to  Petersburg  further  fixed 
the  number  of  militia  at  three  hundred,  and  of 
blacks  at  eight  hundred,  and  invented  a  conven 
ient  shower  of  rain  to  explain  the  dampened 
ardor  of  the  whites.  Later  reports  described 
the  slaves  as  making  three  desperate  attempts 
to  cross  the  bridge  over  the  Nottoway  between 
Cross  Keys  and  Jerusalem,  and  stated  that  the 
leader  had  been  shot  in  the  attempt.  Other 
accounts  put  the  number  of  negroes  at  three 
hundred,  all  well  mounted  and  armed,  with  two 
or  three  white  men  as  leaders.  Their  intention 
was  supposed  to  be  to  reach  the  Dismal  Swamp, 
and  they  must  be  hemmed  in  from  that  side. 

Indeed,  the  most  formidable  weapon  in  the 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  295 

hands  of  slave  insurgents  is  always  this  blind 
panic  they  create,  and  the  wild  exaggerations 
which  follow.  The  worst  being  possible,  every 
one  takes  the  worst  for  granted.  Undoubtedly 
a  dozen  armed  men  could  have  stifled  this 
insurrection,  even  after  it  had  commenced 
operations  ;  but  it  is  the  fatal  weakness  of  a 
rural  slaveholding  community,  that  it  can  never 
furnish  men  promptly  for  such  a  purpose. 
"  My  first  intention  was,"  says  one  of  the  most 
intelligent  newspaper  narrators  of  the  affair, 
"  to  have  attacked  them  with  thirty  or  forty 
men;  but  those  who  had  families  here  were 
strongly  opposed  to  it." 

As  usual,  each  man  was  pinioned  to  his  own 
hearth-stone.  As  usual,  aid  had  to  be  sum 
moned  from  a  distance ;  and,  as  usual,  the 
United-States  troops  were  the  chief  reliance. 
Col.  House,  commanding  at  Fort  Monroe,  sent 
at  once  three  companies  of  artillery  under 
Lieut.-Col.  Worth,  and  embarked  them  on  board 
the  steamer  "  Hampton "  for  Suffolk.  These 
were  joined  by  detachments  from  the  United- 
States  ships  u  Warren  "  and  "  Natchez,"  the 


296  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

whole  amounting  to  nearly  eight  hundred  men. 
Two  volunteer  companies  went  from  Richmond, 
four  from  Petersburg,  one  from  Norfolk,  one 
from  Portsmouth,  and  several  from  North 
Carolina.  The  militia  of  Norfolk,  Nansemond, 
and  Princess  Anne  Counties,  and  the  United- 
States  troops  at  Old  Point  Comfort,  were 
ordered  to  scour  the  Dismal  Swamp,  where  it 
was  believed  that  two  or  three  thousand  fugi 
tives  were  preparing  to  join  the  insurgents. 
It  was  even  proposed  to  send  two  companies 
from  New  York  and  one  from  New  London 
to  the  same  point. 

When  these  various  forces  reached  South 
ampton  County,  they  found  all  labor  paralyzed 
and  whole  plantations  abandoned.  A  letter 
from  Jerusalem,  dated  Aug.  24,  says,  "  The 
oldest  inhabitant  of  our  county  has  never 
experienced  such  a  distressing  time  as  we  have 
had  since  Sunday  night  last.  .  .  .  Every  house, 
room,  and  corner  in  this  place  is  full  of  women 
and  children,  driven  from  home,  who  had  to 
take  the  woods  until  they  could  get  to  this 
place."  "  For  many  miles  around  their  track," 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  297 

says  another  "  the  county  is  deserted  by  women 
and  children."  Still  another  writes,  "  Jerusalem 
is  full  of  women,  most  of  them  from  the  other 
side  of  the  river,  —  about  two  hundred  at 
Vix's."  Then  follow  descriptions  of  the  suffer 
ings  of  these  persons,  many  of  whom  had  lain 
night  after  night  in  the' woods.  But  the  imme 
diate  danger  was  at  an  end,  the  short-lived 
insurrection  was  finished,  and  now  the  work  of 
vengeance  was  to  begin.  In  the  frank  phrase 
of  a  North-Carolina  correspondent,  "  The 
massacre  of  the  whites  was  over,  and  the  white 
people  had  commenced  the  destruction  of  the 
negroes,  which  was  continued  after  our  men  got 
there,  from  time  to  time,  as  they  could  fall  in 
with  them,  all  day  yesterday."  A  postscript 
adds,  that  "  passengers  by  the  Fayetteville 
stage  say,  that,  by  the  latest  accounts,  one 
hundred  and  twenty  negroes  had  been  killed," 
—  this  being  little  more  than  one  day's 
work. 

These  murders  were  defended  as  Nat  Turner 
defended  his  :  a  fearful  blow  must  be  struck. 
In  shuddering  at  the  horrors  of  the  insurrection, 


298  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

we  have  forgotten  the  far  greater  horrors  of  its 
suppression. 

The  newspapers  of  the  day  contain  many 
indignant  protests  against  the  cruelties  which 
took  place.  "  It  is  with  pain,"  tsays  a  corre 
spondent  of  the  National  Intelligencer,  Sept. 
7,  1831,  "  that  we  speak  of  another  feature  of 
the  Southampton  Rebellion;  for  we  have  been 
most  unwilling  to  have  our  sympathies  for  the 
sufferers  diminished  or  affected  by  their  mis 
conduct.  We  allude  to  the  slaughter  of  many 
blacks  without  trial  and  under  circumstances 
of  great  barbarity.  .  .  .  We  met  with  an 
individual  of  intelligence  who  told  us  that  he 
himself  had  killed  between  ten  and  fifteen.  .  .  . 
We  [the  Richmond  troop]  witnessed  with  sur 
prise  the  'sanguinary  temper  of  the  population, 
who  evinced  a  strong  disposition  to  inflict 
immediate  death  on  every  prisoner." 

There  is  a  remarkable  official  document  from 
Gen.  Eppes,  the  officer  in  command,  to  be  found 
in  the  Richmond  Enquirer  for  Sept.  6,  1831. 
It  is  an  indignant  denunciation  of  precisely 
these  outrages ;  and  though  he  refuses  to  give 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  299 

details,  he  supplies  their  place  by  epithets : 
"  revolting,"  -  -  "  inhuman  and  not  to  be  justi 
fied,"  —  "  acts  of  barbarity  and  cruelty,"  — 
"  acts  of  atrocity,"  -  — "  this  course  of  proceeding 
dignifies  the  rebel  and  the  assassin  with  the 
sanctity  of  martyrdom."  And  he  ends  by 
threatening  martial  law  upon  all  future  trans 
gressors.  Such  general  orders  are  not  issued 
except  in  rather  extreme  cases.  And  in  the 
parallel  columns  of  the  newspaper  the  innocent 
editor  prints  equally  indignant  descriptions  of 
Russian  atrocities  in  Lithuania,  where  the  Poles 
were  engaged  in  active  insurrection,  amid 
profuse  sympathy  from  Virginia. 

The  truth  is,  it  was  a  Reign  of  Terror. 
Volunteer  patrols  rode  in  all  directions,  visiting 
plantations.  "  It  was  with  the  greatest  diffi 
culty,"  said  Gen.  Brodnax  before  the  House  of 
Delegates,  "  and  at  the  hazard  of  personal 
popularity  and  esteem,  that  the  coolest  and 
most  judicious  among  us  could  exert  an  influ 
ence  sufficient  to  restrain  an  indiscriminate 
slaughter  of  the  blacks  who  were  suspected." 
A  letter  from  the  Rev.  G.  W.  Powell  declares, 


300       TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

"  There  are  thousands  of  -troops  searching  in 
every  direction,  and  many  negroes  are  killed 
every  day:  the  exact  number  will  never  be 
ascertained."  Petition  after  petition  was  subse 
quently  presented  to  the  Legislature,  asking 
compensation  for  slaves  thus  assassinated 
without  trial. 

Men  were  tortured  to  death,  burned,  maimed, 
and  subjected  to  nameless  atrocities.  The 
overseers  were  called  on  to  point  out  any  slaves 
whom  they  distrusted,  and  if  any  tried  to 
escape  they  were  shot  down.  Nay,  worse  than 
this.  "A  party  of  horsemen  started  from 
Richmond  with  the  intention  of  killing  every 
colored  person  they  saw  in  Southampton 
County.  They  stopped  opposite  the  cabin  of  a 
free  colored  man,  who  was  hoeing  in  his  little 
field.  They  called  out,  c  Is  this  Southampton 
County?'  He  replied,  'Yes,  sir,  you  have  just 
crossed  the  line,  by  yonder  tree.'  They  shot  him 
dead,  and  rode  on."  This  is  from  the  narrative 
of  the  editor  of  the  Richmond  Whig,  who  was 
then  on  duty  in  the  militia,  and  protested  man 
fully  against  these  outrages.  "Some  of  these 


NAT   TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  301 

scenes,"  he  adds,  "  are  hardly  inferior  in  barbar 
ity  to  the  atrocities  of  the  insurgents." 

These  were  the  masters'  stories.  If  even 
these  conceded  so  much,  it  would  be  interesting 
to  hear  what  the  slaves  had  to  report.  I  am 
indebted  to  my  honored  friend,  Lydia  Maria 
Child,  for  some  vivid  recollections  of  this 
terrible  period,  as  noted  down  from  the  lips  of 
an  old  colored  woman,  once  well  known  in  New 
York,  Charity  Bowery.  "At  the  time  of  the 
old  Prophet  Nat,"  she  said,  "  the  colored  folks 
was  afraid  to  pray  loud ;  for  the  whites  threat 
ened  to  punish  'em  dreadfully,  if  the  least  noise 
was  heard.  The  patrols  was  low  drunken 
whites ;  and  in  Nat's  time,  if  they  heard  any  of 
the  colored  folks  praying,  or  singing  a  hymn, 
they  would  fall  upon  'em  and  abuse  'em,  and 
sometimes  kill  'em,  afore  master  or  missis  could 
get  to  'em.  The  brightest  and  best  was  killed 
in  Nat's  time.  The  whites  always  suspect  such 
ones.  They  killed  a  great  many  at  a  place 
called  Duplon.  They  killed  Antonio,  a  slave 
of  Mr.  J.  Stanley,  whom  they  shot ;  then  they 
pointed  their  guns  at  him,  and  told  him  to 


302  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

confess  about  the  insurrection.  He  told  'em  he 
didn't  know  any  thing  about  any  insurrection. 
They  shot  several  balls  through  him,  quartered 
him,  and  put  his  head  on  a  pole  at  the  fork  of 
the  road  leading  to  the  court."  (This  is  no 
exaggeration,  if  the  Virginia  newspapers  may 
be  taken  as  evidence.)  "  It  was  there  but  a 
short  time.  He  had  no  trial.  They  never  do. 
In  Nat's  time,  the  patrols  would  tie  up  the  free 
colored  people,  flog  'em,  and  try  to  make  'em 
lie  against  one  another,  and  often  killed  them 
before  anybody  could  interfere.  Mr.  James 
Cole,  high  sheriff,  said,  if  any  of  the  patrols 
came  on  his  plantation,  he  would  lose  his  life 
in  defence  of  his  people.  One  day  he^ heard  a 
patroller  boasting  how  many  niggers  he  had 
killed.  Mr.  Cole  said,  '  If  you  don't  pack  up, 
as  quick  as  God  Almighty  will  let  you,  and  get 
out  of  this  town,  and  never  be  seen  in  it  again, 
I'll  put  you  where  dogs  won't  bark  at  you.' 
He  went  off,  and  wasn't  seen  in  them  parts 
again." 

These    outrages   were    not    limited    to    the 
colored  population ;  but  other  instances  occurred 


NAT   TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  303 

which  strikingly  remind  one  of  more  recent 
times.  An  Englishman,  named  Robinson,  was 
engaged  in  selling  books  at  Petersburg.  An 
alarm  being  given,  one  night,  that  five  hundred 
blacks  were  marching  towards  the  town,  he 
stood  guard,  with  others,  on  the  bridge.  After 
the  panic  had  a  little  subsided,  he  happened  to 
remark,  that  "  the  blacks,  as  men,  were  entitled 
to  their  freedom,  and  ought  to  be  emancipated." 
This  led  to  great  excitement,  and  he  was  warned 
to  leave  town.  He  took  passage  in  the  stage, 
but  the  stage  was  intercepted.  He  then  fled  to 
a  friend's  house ;  the  house  was  broken  open, 
and  he  was  dragged  forth.  The  civil  author 
ities,  being  applied  to,  refused  to  interfere. 
The  mob  stripped  him,  gave  him  a  great  num 
ber  of  lashes,  and  sent  him  on  foot,  naked, 
under  a  hot  sun,  to  Richmond,  whence  he  with 
difficulty  found  a  passage  to  New  York. 

Of  the  capture  or  escape  of  most  of  that 
small  band  who  met  with  Nat  Turner  in  the 
woods  upon  the  Travis  plantation,  little  can  now 
be  known.  All  appear  among  the  list  of  con 
victed,  except  Henry  and  Will.  Gen.  Moore, 


304  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

who  occasionally  figures  as  second  in  command, 
in  the  newspaper  narratives  of  that  day,  was 
probably  the  Hark  or  Hercules  before  men 
tioned  ;  as  no  other  of  the  confederates  had 
belonged  to  Mrs.  Travis,  or  would  have  been 
likely  to  bear  her  previous  name  of  Moore.  As 
usual,  the  newspapers  state  that  most,  if  not 
all  the  slaves,  were  "  the  property  of  kind  and 
indulgent  masters." 

The  subordinate  insurgents  sought  safety  as 
they  could.  A  free  colored  man,  named  Will 
Artist,  shot  himself  in  the  woods,  where  his 
hat  was  found  on  a  stake  and  his  pistol  lying  by 
him  ;  another  was  found  drowned ;  others  were 
traced  to  the  Dismal  Swamp ;  others  returned 
to  their  homes,  and  tried  to  conceal  their  share 
in  the  insurrection,  assuring  their  masters  that 
they  had  been  forced,  against  their  will,  to  join, 
—  the  usual  defence  in  such  cases.  The  num 
ber  shot  down  at  random  must,  by  all  accounts, 
have  amounted  to  many  hundreds,  but  it  is  past 
all  human  registration  now.  The  number  who 
had  a  formal  trial,  such  as  it  was,  is  officially 
stated  at  fifty-five;  of  these,  seventeen  were 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  305 

convicted  and  hanged,  twelve  convicted  and 
transported,  twenty  acquitted,  and  four  free 
colored  men  sent  on  for  further  trial  and  finally 
acquitted.  "Not  one  of  those  known  to  be 
concerned  escaped."  Of  those  executed,  one 
only  was  a  woman,  uLucy,  slave  of  John  T. 
Barrow." 

There  is  one  touching  story,  in  connection 
with  these  terrible  retaliations,  which  rests  on 
good  authority,  that  of  the  Rev.  M.  B.  Cox,  a 
Liberian  missionary,  then  in  Virginia.  In  the 
hunt  which  followed  the  massacre,  a  slaveholder 
went  into  the  woods,  accompanied  by  a  faithful 
slave,  who  had  been  the  means  of  saving  his 
life  during  the  insurrection.  When  they  had 
reached  a  retired  place  in  the  forest,  the  man 
handed  his  gun  to  his  master,  informing  him 
that  he  could  not  live  a  slave  any  longer,  and 
requesting  him  either  to  free  him  or  shoot  him 
on  the  spot.  The  master  took  the  gun,  in  some 
trepidation,  levelled  it  at  the  faithful  negro,  and 
shot  him  through  the  heart.  It  is  probable  that 
this  slaveholder  was  a  Dr.  Blunt,  —  his  being 
the  only  plantation  where  the  slaves  were 


306  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

reported  as  thus  defending  their  masters.  "If 
this  be  true,"  said  the  Richmond  Enquirer, 
when  it  first  narrated  this  instance  of  loyalty, 
"  great  will  be  the  desert  of  these  noble-minded 
Africans." 

Meanwhile  the  panic  of  the  whites  continued ; 
for,  though  all  others  might  be  disposed  of,  Nat 
Turner  was  still  at  large.  We  have  positive 
evidence  of  the  extent  of  the  alarm,  although 
great  efforts  were  afterwards  made  to  repre 
sent  it  as  a  trifling  affair.  A  distinguished 
citizen  of  Virginia  wrote,  three  months  later,  to 
the  Hon.  W.  B.  Seabrook  of  South  Carolina, 
"From  all  that  has  come  to  my  knowledge 
during  and  since  that  affair,  I  am  convinced 
most  fully  that  every  black  preacher  in  the 
country  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge  was  in  the 
secret."  "There  is  much  reason  to  believe," 
says  the  Governor's  Message  on  Dec.  6,  "that 
the  spirit  of  insurrection  was  not  confined  to 
Southampton.  Many  convictions  have  taken 
place  elsewhere,  and  some  few  in  distant 
counties."  The  withdrawal  of  the  United- 
States  troops,  after  some  ten  days'  service,  was 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  307 

a  signal  for  fresh  excitement ;  and  an  address, 
numerously  signed,  was  presented  to  the  United- 
States  Government,  imploring  their  continued 
stay.  More  than  three  weeks  after  the  first 
alarm,  the  governor  sent  a  supply  of  arms  into 
Prince  William,  Fauquier,  and  Orange  Counties. 
"  From  examinations  which  have  taken  place  in 
other  counties,"  says  one  of  the  best  newspaper 
historians  of  the  affair  (in  the  Richmond 
Enquirer  of  Sept.  6),  "  I  fear  that  the  scheme 
embraced  a  wider  sphere  than  I  at  first  sup 
posed."  Nat  Turner  himself,  intentionally 
or  otherwise,  increased  the  confusion  by  denying 
all  knowledge  of  the  North-Carolina  outbreak, 
and  declaring  that  he  had  communicated  his 
plans  to  his  four  confederates  within  six 
months ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  a  slave-girl, 
sixteen  or  seventeen  years  old,  belonging  to 
Solomon  Parker,  testified  that  she  had  heard 
the  subject  discussed  for  eighteen  months,  and 
that  at  a  meeting  held  during  the  previous  May 
some  eight  or  ten  had  joined  the  plot. 

It   is   astonishing   to    discover,  by  laborious 
comparison  of  newspaper  files,  how  vast  was 


308  TRAVELLERS   AND  OUTLAWS 

the  immediate  range  of  these  insurrectionary 
alarms.  Every  Southern  State  seems  to  have 
borne  its  harvest  of  terror.  On  the  eastern 
shore  of  Maryland,  great  alarm  was  at  once 
manifested,  especially  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Easton  and  Snowhill ;  and  the  houses  of  colored 
men  were  searched  for  arms  even  in  Baltimore. 
In  Delaware,  there  were  similar  rumors  through 
Sussex  and  Dover  Counties ;  there  were  arrests 
and  executions ;  and  in  Somerset  County  great 
public  meetings  were  held,  to  demand  additional 
safeguards.  On  election-day  in  Seaford,  Del., 
some  young  men,  going  out  to  hunt  rabbits, 
discharged  their  guns  in  sport ;  the  men  being 
absent,  all  the  women  in  the  vicinity  took  to 
flight ;  the  alarm  spread  like  the  "  Ipswich 
Fright " ;  soon  Seaford  was  thronged  with 
armed  men  ;  and  when  the  boys  returned  from 
hunting,  they  found  cannon  drawn  out  to 
receive  them. 

In  North  Carolina,  Raleigh  and  Fayetteville 
were  put  under  military  defence,  and  women 
and  children  concealed  themselves  in  the 
swamps  for  many  days.  The  rebel  organization 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  309 

was  supposed  to  include  two  thousand.  Forty- 
six  slaves  were  imprisoned  in  Union  County, 
twenty-five  in  Sampson  County,  and  twenty- 
three  at  least  in  Duplin  County,  some  of  whom 
were  executed.  The  panic  also  extended  into 
Wayne,  New  Hanover,  and  Lenoir  Counties. 
Four  men  were  shot  without  trial  in  Wilming 
ton,  —  Nimrod,  Abraham,  Prince,  and  "  Dan  the 
Drayman,"  the  latter  a  man  of  seventy,  —  and 
their  heads  placed  on  poles  at  the  four  corners 
of  the  town.  Nearly  two  months  afterwards 
the  trials  were  still  continuing ;  and  at  a  still 
later  day,  the  governor  in  his  proclamation 
recommended  the  formation  of  companies  of 
volunteers  in  every  county. 

In  South  Carolina,  Gen.  Hayne  issued  a 
proclamation  "  to  prove  the  groundlessness  of 
the  existing  alarms,"  -  thus  implying  that 
serious  alarms  existed.  In  Macon,  Ga.,  the 
whole  population  were  roused  from  their  beds 
at  midnight  by  a  report  of  a  large  force  of 
armed  negroes  five  miles  off.  In  an  hour,  every 
woman  and  child  was  deposited  in  the  largest 
building  of  the  town,  and  a  military  force 


310  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

hastily  collected  in  front.  The  editor  of  the 
Macon  Messenger  excused  the  poor  condition 
of  his  paper,  a  few  days  afterwards,  by  the 
absorption  of  his  workmen  in  patrol  duties,  and 
describes  "  dismay  and  terror  "  as  the  condition 
of  the  people  of  "all  ages  and  sexes."  In 
Jones,  Twiggs,  and  Monroe  Counties,  the  same 
alarms  were  reported ;  and  in  one  place  "  several 
slaves  were  tied  to  a  tree,  while  a  militia  captain 
hacked  at  them  with  his  sword." 

In  Alabama,  at  Columbus  and  Fort  Mitchell, 
a  rumor  was  spread  of  a  joint  conspiracy  of 
Indians  and  negroes.  At  Claiborne  the  panic 
was  still  greater:  the  slaves  were  said  to  be 
thoroughly  organized  through  that  part  of  the 
State,  and  multitudes  were  imprisoned ;  the 
whole  alarm  being  apparently  founded  on  one 
stray  copy  of  the  Boston  Liberator. 

In  Tennessee,  the  Shelbyville  Freeman  an 
nounced  that  an  insurrectionary  plot  had  just 
been  discovered,  barely  in  time  for  its  defeat, 
through  the  treachery  of  a  female  slave.  In 
Louisville,  Ky.,  a  similar  organization  was 
discovered  or  imagined,  and  arrests  were  made 


NAT   TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  311 

in  consequence.  "  The  papers,  from  motives  of 
policy,  do  not  notice  the  disturbance,"  wrote 
one  correspondent  to  the  Portland  Courier. 
"  Pity  us  !  "  he  added. 

But  the  greatest  bubble  burst  in  Louisiana. 
Capt.  Alexander,  an  English  tourist,  arriving 
in  New  Orleans  at  the  beginning  of  September, 
found  the  whole  city  in  tumult.  Handbills  had 
been  issued,  appealing  to  the  slaves  to  rise 
against  their  masters,  saying  that  all  men  were 
born  equal,  declaring  that  Hannibal  was  a  black 
man,  and  that  they  also  might  have  great 
leaders  among  them.  Twelve  hundred  stand  of 
weapons  were  said  to  have  been  found  in  a  black 
man's  house  ;  five  hundred  citizens  were  under 
arms,  and  four  companies  of  regulars  were 
ordered  to  the  city,  whose  barracks  Alexander 
himself  visited. 

If  such  was  the  alarm  in  New  Orleans,  the 
story,  of  course,  lost  nothing  by  transmission  to 
other  slave  States.  A  rumor  reached  Frank 
fort,  Ky.,  that  the  slaves  already  had  possession 
of  the  coast,  both  above  and  below  New 
Orleans.  But  the  most  remarkable  circum- 


312  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

stance  is,  that  all  this  seems  to  have  been  a 
mere  revival  of  an  old  terror  once  before 
excited  and  exploded.  The  following  paragraph 
had  appeared  in  the  Jacksonville,  Ga.,  Observer, 
during  the  spring  previous  :  — 

"  FEARFUL  DISCOVERY.  —  We  were  favored,  by  yes 
terday's  mail,  with  a  letter  from  New  Orleans,  of  May  1, 
in  which  we  find  that  an  important  discovery  had  been 
made  a  few  days  previous  in  that  city.  The  following 
is  an  extract :  *  Four  days  ago,  as  some  planters  were 
digging  under  ground,  they  found  a  square  room  con 
taining  eleven  thousand  stand  of  arms  and  fifteen 
thousand  cartridges,  each  of  the  cartridges  containing  a 
bullet.'  It  is  said  the  negroes  intended  to  rise  as  soon 
as  the  sickly  season  began,  and  obtain  possession  of  the 
city  by  massacring  the  white  population.  The  same 
letter  states  that  the  mayor  had  prohibited  the  opening 
of  Sunday  schools  for  the  instruction  of  blacks,  under  a 
penalty  of  five  hundred  dollars  for  the  first  offence, 
and,  for  the  second,  death." 

Such  were  the  terrors  that  came  back  from 
nine  other  slave  States,  as  the  echo  of  the 
voice  of  Nat  Turner.  And  when  it  is  also 
known  that  the  subject  was  at  once  taken  up 
by  the  legislatures  of  other  States,  where  there 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  313 

was  no  public  panic,  as  in  Missouri  and 
Tennessee ;  and  when,  finally,  it  is  added  that 
reports  of  insurrection  had  been  arriving  all 
that  year  from  Rio  Janeiro,  Martinique,  St. 
Jago,  Antigua,  Caraccas,  and  Tortola,  —  it  is 
easy  to  see  with  what  prolonged  distress  the 
accumulated  terror  must  have  weighed  down 
upon  Virginia  during  the  two  months  that 
Nat  Turner  lay  hid. 

True,  there  were  a  thousand  men  in  arms  in 
Southampton  County,  to  inspire  security.  But 
the  blow  had  been  struck  by  only  seven  men 
before ;  and  unless  there  were  an  armed  guard 
in  every  house,  who  could  tell  but  any  house 
might  at  any  moment  be  the  scene  of  new 
horrors  ?  They  might  kill  or  imprison  negroes 
by  day,  but  could  they  resist  their  avengers  by 
night?  "The  half  cannot  be  told,"  wrote  a 
lady  from  another  part  of  Virginia,  at  this  time, 
"of  the  distresses  of  the  people.  In  South 
ampton  County,  the  scene  of  the  insurrection, 
the  distress  beggars  description.  A  gentleman 
who  has  been  there  says  that  even  here,  where 
there  has  been  great  alarm,  we  have  no  idea 


314  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

of  the  situation  of  those  in  that  county.  .  .  . 
I  do  not  hesitate  to  believe  that  many  negroes 
around  us  would  join  in  a  massacre  as  horrible 
as  that  which  has  taken  place,  if  an  opportunity 
should  offer." 

Meanwhile  the  cause  of  all  this  terror  was 
made  the  object  of  desperate  search.  On  Sept. 
17  the  governor  offered  a  reward  of  five  hundred 
dollars  for  his  capture  ;  and  there  were  other 
rewards,  swelling  the  amount  to  eleven  hun 
dred  dollars,  —  but  in  vain.  No  one  could 
track  or  trap  him.  On  Sept.  30  a  minute 
account  of  his  capture  appeared  in  the  news 
papers,  but  it  was  wholly  false.  On  Oct.  7 
there  was  another,  and  on  Oct.  18  another ; 
yet  all  without  foundation.  Worn  out  by  con 
finement  in  his  little  cave,  Nat  Turner  grew 
more  adventurous,  and  began  to  move  about 
stealthily  by  night,  afraid  to  speak  to  any 
human  being,  but  hoping  to  obtain  some  infor 
mation  that  might  aid  his  escape.  Returning 
regularly  to  his  retreat  before  daybreak,  he 
might  possibly  have  continued  this  mode  of 
life  until  pursuit  had  ceased,  had  not  a  dog 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  315 

succeeded  where  men  had  failed.  The  crea 
ture  accidentally  smelt  out  the  provisions  hid 
in  the  cave,  and  finally  led  thither  his  masters, 
two  negroes,  one  of  whom  was  named  Nelson. 
On  discovering  the  formidable  fugitive,  they 
fled  precipitately,  when  he  hastened  to  retreat 
in  an  opposite  direction.  This  was  on  Oct.  15; 
and  from  this  moment  the  neighborhood  was  all 
alive  with  excitement,  and  five  or  six  hundred 
men  undertook  the  pursuit. 

It  shows  a  more  than  Indian  adroitness  in 
Nat  Turner  to  have  escaped  capture  any  longer. 
The  cave,  the  arms,  the  provisions,  were  found  ; 
and,  lying  among  them,  the  notched  stick  of 
this  miserable  Robinson  Crusoe,  marked  with 
five  weary  weeks  and  six  days.  But  the  man 
was  gone.  For  ten  days  more  he  concealed 
himself  among  the  wheat-stacks  on  Mr.  Francis's 
plantation,  and  during  this  time  was  reduced 
almost  to  despair.  Once  he  decided  to  sur 
render  himself,  and  walked  by  night  within 
two  miles  of  Jerusalem  before  his  purpose 
failed  him.  Three  times  he  tried  to  get  out 
of  that  neighborhood,  but  in  vain  :  travelling 


316  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

by  day  was  of  course  out  of  the  question,  and 
by  night  he  found  it  impossible  to  elude  the 
patrol.  Again  and  again,  therefore,  he  returned 
to  his  hiding-place ;  and,  during  his  whole  two 
months'  liberty,  never  went  five  miles  from  the 
Cross  Keys.  On  the  25th  of  October,  he  was 
at  last  discovered  by  Mr.  Francis  as  he  was 
emerging  from  a  stack.  A  load  of  buckshot 
was  instantly  discharged  at  him,  twelve  of 
which  passed  through  his  hat  as  he  fell  to  the 
ground.  He  escaped  even  then  ;  but  his  pur 
suers  were  rapidly  concentrating  upon  him,  and 
it  is  perfectly  astonishing  that  he  could  have 
eluded  them  for  five  days  more. 

On  Sunday,  Oct.  30,  a  man  named  Benjamin 
Phipps,  going  out  for  the  first  time  on  patrol 
duty,  was  passing  at  noon  a  clearing  in  the 
woods  where  a  number  of  pine-trees  had  long 
since  been  felled.  There  was  a  motion  among 
their  boughs ;  he  stopped  to  watch  it ;  and 
through  a  gap  in  the  branches  he  saw,  emerging 
from  a  hole  in  the  earth  beneath,  the  face  of 
Nat  Turner.  Aiming  his  gun  instantly,  Phipps 
called  on  him  to  surrender.  The  fugitive. 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  817 

exhausted  with  watching  and  privation,  entan 
gled  in  the  branches,  armed  only  with  a  sword, 
had  nothing  to  do  but  to  yield,  —  sagaciously 
reflecting,  also,  as  he  afterwards  explained,  that 
the  woods  were  full  of  armed  men,  and  that  he 
had  better  trust  fortune  for  some  later  chance 
of  escape,  instead  of  desperately  attempting  it 
then.  He  was  correct  in  the  first  impression, 
since  there  were  fifty  armed  scouts  within  a 
circuit  of  two  miles.  His  insurrection  ended 
where  it  began ;  for  this  spot  was  only  a  mile 
and  a  half  from  the  house  of  Joseph  Travis. 

Torn,  emaciated,  ragged,  "ti  mere  scare 
crow,"  still  wearing  the  hat  perforated  with 
buckshot,  with  his  arms  bound  to  his  sides,  he 
was  driven  before  the  levelled  gun  to  the  near 
est  house,  that  of  a  Mr.  Edwards.  He  was  con 
fined  there  that  night ;  but  the  news  had  spread 
so  rapidly  that  within  an  hour  after  his  arrival 
a  hundred  persons  had  collected,  and  the  excite 
ment  became  so  intense  "  that  it  was  with 
difficulty  he  could  be  conveyed  alive  to  Jerusa 
lem."  The  enthusiasm  spread  instantly  through 
Virginia ;  M.  Trezvant,  the  Jerusalem  post- 


318  TRAVELLERS   AND   OUTLAWS 

master,  sent  notices  of  it  far  and  near ;  and 
Gov.  Floyd  himself  wrote  a  letter  to  the 
Richmond  Enquirer  to  give  official  announce 
ment  of  the  momentous  capture. 

When  Nat  Turner  was  asked  by  Mr.  T.  R. 
Gray,  the  counsel  assigned  him,  whether, 
although  defeated,  he  still  believed  in  his  own 
Providential  mission,  he  answered,  as  simply  as 
one  who  came  thirty  years  after  him,  "  Was  not 
Christ  crucified?"  In  the  same  spirit,  when 
arraigned  before  the  court,  "  he  answered,  '  Not 
guilty,'  saying  to  his  counsel  that  he  did  not  feel 
so."  But  apparently  no  argument  was  made  in 
his  favor  by  his  counsel,  nor  were  any  witnesses 
called,  —  he  being  convicted  on  the  testimony 
of  Levi  Waller,  and  upon  his  own  confession, 
which  was  put  in  by  Mr.  Gray,  and  acknowl 
edged  by  the  prisoner  before  the  six  justices 
composing  the  court,  as  being  "  full,  free,  and 
voluntary."  He  was  therefore  placed  in  the 
paradoxical  position  of  conviction  by  his  o\vn 
confession,  under  a  plea  of  "  Not  guilty."  The 
arrest  took  place  on  the  30th  of  October,  1831, 
the  confession  on  the  1st  of  November,  the  trial 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  319 

and  conviction  on  the  5th,  and  the  execution  on 
the  following  Friday,  the  llth  of  November, 
precisely  at  noon.  He  met  his  death  with 
perfect  composure,  declined  addressing  the 
multitude  assembled,  and  told  the  sheriff  in  a 
firm  voice  that  he  was  ready.  Another  account 
says  that  he  "  betrayed  no  emotion,  and  even 
hurried  the  executioner  in  the  performance  of 
his  duty."  "Not  a  limb  nor  a  muscle  was 
observed  to  move.  His  body,  after  his  death, 
was  given  over  to  the  surgeons  for  dissection." 
The  confession  of  the  captive  was  published 
under  authority  of  Mr.  Gray,  in  a  pamphlet,  at 
Baltimore.  Fifty  thousand  copies  of  it  are  said 
to  have  been  printed ;  and  it  was  "  embellished 
with  an  accurate  likeness  of  the  brigand,  taken 
by  Mr.  John  Crawley,  portrait-painter,  and 
lithographed  by  Endicott  &  Swett,  at  Balti 
more."  The  newly  established  Liberator  said 
of  it,  at  the  time,  that  it  would  "only  serve 
to  rouse  up  other  leaders,  and  hasten  other 
insurrections,"  and  advised  grand  juries  to 
indict  Mr.  Gray.  I  have  never  seen  a  copy  of 
the  original  pamphlet ;  it  is  not  easily  to  be 


320  TRAVELLERS  AND   OUTLAWS 

found  in  any  of  our  public  libraries ;  and  I  have 
heard  of  but  one  as  still  existing,  although  the 
Confession  itself  has  been  repeatedly  reprinted. 
Another  small  pamphlet,  containing  the  main 
features  of  the  outbreak,  was  published  at  New 
York  during  the  same  year,  and  this  is  in  my 
possession.  But  the  greater  part  of  the  facts 
which  I  have  given  were  gleaned  from  the 
contemporary  newspapers. 

Who  now  shall  go  back  thirty  years,  and 
read  the  heart  of  this  extraordinary  man,  who, 
by  the  admission  of  his  captors,  "never  was 
known  to  swear  an  oath,  or  drink  a  drop  of 
spirits ; "  who,  on  the  same  authority,  "  for 
natural  intelligence  and  quickness  of  appre 
hension  was  surpassed  by  few  men,"  "with  a 
mind  capable  of  attaining  any  thing ; "  who 
knew  no  book  but  his  Bible,  and  that  by  heart ; 
who  devoted  himself  soul  and  body  to  the 
cause  of  his  race,  without  a  trace  of  personal 
hope  or  fear ;  who  laid  his  plans  so  shrewdly 
that  they  came  at  last  with  less  warning  than 
any  earthquake  on  the  doomed  community 
around;  and  who,  when  that  time  arrived, 


NAT  TURNER'S  INSURRECTION  321 

took  the  life  of  man,  woman,  and  child,  with 
out  a  throb  of  compunction,  a  word  of  exulta 
tion,  or  an  act  of  superfluous  outrage?  Mrs. 
Stowe's  "  Dred "  seems  dim  and  melodramatic 
beside  the  actual  Nat  Turner,  and  De  Quin- 
cey's  "  Avenger  "  is  his  only  parallel  in  imagin 
ative  literature.  Mr.  Gray,  his  counsel,  rises 
into  a  sort  of  bewildered  enthusiasm  with  the 
prisoner  before  him.  "  I  shall  not  attempt  to 
describe  the  effect  of  his  narrative,  as  told  and 
commented  on  by  himself,  in  the  condemned- 
hole  of  the  prison.  The  calm,  deliberate  com 
posure  with  which  he  spoke  of  his  late  deeds 
and  intentions,  the  expression  of  his  fiend-like 
face  when  excited  by  enthusiasm,  still  bearing 
the  stains  of  the  blood  of  helpless  innocence 
about  him,  clothed  with  rags  and  covered  with 
chains,  yet  daring  to  raise  his  manacled  hands 
to  heaven,  with  a  spirit  soaring  above  the 
attributes  of  man,  —  I  looked  on  him,  and  the 
blood  curdled  in  my  veins." 

But,  the  more  remarkable  the  personal  char 
acter  of  Nat  Turner,  the  greater  the  amaze 
ment  felt  that  he  should  not  have  appreciated 


322       TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

the  extreme  felicity  of  his  position  as  a  slave. 
In  all  insurrections,  the  standing  wonder  seems 
to  be  that  the  slaves  most  trusted  and  best 
used  should  be  most  deeply  involved.  So  in 
this  case,  as  usual,  men  resorted  to  the  most 
astonishing  theories  of  the  origin  of  the  affair. 
One  attributed  it  to  Free-Masonry,  and  another 
to  free  whiskey,  —  liberty  appearing  dangerous, 
even  in  these  forms.  The  poor  whites  charged 
it  upon  the  free  colored  people,  and  urged 
their  expulsion ;  forgetting  that  in  North  Caro 
lina  the  plot  was  betrayed  by  one  of  this 
class,  and  that  in  Virginia  there  were  but  two 
engaged,  both  of  whom  had  slave  wives.  The 
slaveholding  clergymen  traced  it  to  want  of 
knowledge  of  the  Bible,  forgetting  that  Nat 
Turner  knew  scarcely  any  thing  else.  On  the 
other  hand,  "a  distinguished  citizen  of  Vir 
ginia  "  combined  in  one  sweeping  denunciation 
"  Northern  incendiaries,  tracts,  Sunday  schools, 
religion,  reading,  and  writing." 

But  whether  the  theories  of  its  origin  were 
wise  or  foolish,  the  insurrection  made  its  mark ; 
and  the  famous  band  of  Virginia  emancipa- 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  323 

tionists,  who  all  that  winter  made  the  House 
of  Delegates  ring  with  unavailing  eloquence,  — 
till  the  rise  of  slave-exportation  to  new  cot 
ton  regions  stopped  their  voices,  —  were  but 
the  unconscious  mouthpieces  of  Nat  Turner. 
In  January,  1832,  in  reply  to  a  member  who 
had  called  the  outbreak  a  "petty  affair,"  the 
eloquent  James  McDowell  thus  described  the 
impression  it  left  behind  :  — 

"Now,  sir,  I  ask  you,  I  ask  gentlemen  in 
conscience  to  say,  was  that  a  4  petty  affair ' 
which  startled  the  feelings  of  your  whole  popu 
lation  ;  which  threw  a  portion  of  it  into  alarm, 
a  portion  of  it  into  panic ;  which  wrung  out 
from  an  affrighted  people  the  thrilling  cry,  day 
after  day,  conveyed  to  your  executive,  '  We  are 
in  peril  of  our  lives ;  send  us  an  army  for 
defence'?  Was  that  a  'petty  affair'  which 
drove  families  from  their  homes,  —  which 
assembled  women  and  children  in  crowds, 
without  shelter,  at  places  of  common  refuge,  in 
every  condition  of  weakness  and  infirmity, 
under  every  suffering  which  want  and  terror 
could  inflict,  yet  willing  to  endure  all,  willing 


324  TRAVELLERS   AND    OUTLAWS 

to  meet  death  from  famine,  death  from  climate, 
death  from  hardships,  preferring  any  thing 
rather  than  the  horrors  of  meeting  it  from  a 
domestic  assassin  ?  Was  that  a  c  petty  affair ' 
which  erected  a  peaceful  and  confiding  por 
tion  of  the  State  into  a  military  camp ;  which 
outlawed  from  pity  the  unfortunate  beings 
whose  brothers  had  offended;  which  barred 
every  door,  penetrated  every  bosom  with  fear  or 
suspicion ;  which  so  banished  every  sense  of 
security  from  every  man's  dwelling,  that,  let 
but  a  hoof  or  horn  break  upon  the  silence  of 
the  night,  and  an  aching  throb  would  be  driven 
to  the  heart,  the  husband  would  look  to  his 
weapon,  and  the  mother  would  shudder  and 
weep  upon  her  cradle  ?  Was  it  the  fear  of  Nat 
Turner,  and  his  deluded,  drunken  handful  of 
followers,  which  produced  such  effects?  Was 
it  this  that  induced  distant  counties,  where  the 
very  name  of  Southampton  was  strange,  to  arm 
and  equip  for  a  struggle  ?  No,  sir :  it  was  the 
suspicion  eternally  attached  to  the  slave  himself, 
—  the  suspicion  that  a  Nat  Turner  might  be  in 
every  family ;  that  the  same  bloody  deed  might 


NAT  TURNER'S   INSURRECTION  325 

be  acted  over  at  any  time  and  in  any  place ; 
that  the  materials  for  it  were  spread  through 
the  land,  and  were  always  ready  for  a  like 
explosion.  Nothing  but  the  force  of  this 
withering  apprehension,  —  nothing  but  the 
paralyzing  and  deadening  weight  with  which 
it  falls  upon  and  prostrates  the  heart  of  every 
man  who  has  helpless  dependants  to  protect,  — 
nothing  but  this  could  have  thrown  a  brave 
people  into  consternation,  or  could  have  made 
any  portion  of  this  powerful  Commonwealth, 
for  a  single  instant,  to  have  quailed  and 
trembled." 

While  these  things  were  going  on,  the 
enthusiasm  for  the  Polish  Revolution  was  rising 
to  its  height.  The  nation  was  ringing  with  a 
peal  of  joy,  on  hearing  that  at  Frankfort  the 
Poles  had  killed  fourteen  thousand  Russians. 
The  Southern  Religious  Telegraph  was  pub 
lishing  an  impassioned  address  to  Kosciuszko ; 
standards  were  being  consecrated  for  Poland  in 
the  larger  cities ;  heroes  like  Skrzynecki, 
Czartoryski,  Rozyski,  Raminski,  were  choking 
the  trump  of  Fame  with  their  complicated 


326  TRAVELLERS  AND  OUTLAWS 

patronymics.  These  are  all  forgotten  now ;  and 
this  poor  negro,  who  did  not  even  possess  a 
name,  beyond  one  abrupt  monosyllable,  —  for 
even  the  name  of  Turner  was  the  master's 
property,  —  still  lives,  a  memory  of  terror,  and 
a  symbol  of  wild  retribution. 